Original Article



International Journal of Audiology 2005; 44:31 /38

John D. Durrant*
Catherine V. Palmer*
Thomas Lunner$
*Departments of Communication
Science and Disorders and
Otolaryngology, University of
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, USA
$
Oticon A/S, Research Centre
Eriksholm, Snekkersten, Denmark,
and Department of Technical
Audiology, Linköping University,
Sweden

Key Words
Hearing impairment
Hearing aids
Alzheimer’s disease
Aging
Mathematical model
Dynamic systems
Single-subject design
Outcomes measures

Analysis of counted behaviors in a singlesubject design: Modeling of hearing-aid
intervention in hearing-impaired patients with
Alzheimer’s disease
Análisis del conteo de conductas en un diseño
unipersonal: Modelo de intervención con auxiliar
auditivo en pacientes hipoacúsicos con enfermedad de
Alzheimer
Abstract

Sumario

Clinical procedures related to patients with Alzheimer’s
Disease (AD) largely fail to address the patient’s hearing.
Given the challenges of this population, unconventional
indicators of treatment efficacy may be required. Palmer
et al (1999) reported on caregiver-tracked behaviors as
outcome measures for hearing aid intervention. Using
these data, hearing aid use and subsequent behavior was
modeled as a first-order dynamic system, characterized
by responses following an exponential time course. The
results of such modeling suggest predictable outcomes of
hearing aid intervention, or at least useful parameters of
quantification (e.g. time-constant and steady-state response), permitting critical assessment of effects of
intervention on negative behaviors versus hearing aid
use, comparisons among behaviors, and/or comparisons
of hearing-aid-use patterns and behavior counts among
patients. Use in this and other difficult-to-test populations warrant further study to evaluate clinical efficacy of
the analysis described.

Los procedimientos clı́nicos relacionados con pacientes
con Enfermedad de Alzheimer (AD) fracasan en su
intento de medir la audición. Los retos de esta poblacıón
obligan a utilizar indicadores no convencionales de
eficacia de tratamiento. Palmer et al (1999) reportaron
sobre las observaciones que hacı́a el cuidador responsable, en la conducta del paciente, después de una
intervención con auxiliar auditivo. El uso de un auxiliar
auditivo y la conducta subsiguiente, se utilizaron para
crear un modelo dinámico de primer orden, caracterizado
por las respuestas subsecuentes a un tiempo exponencial.
Los resultados de este modelo sugieren resultados
predecibles en la adaptación de un auxiliar auditivo o al
menos, parámetros útiles de cuantificación (p.ej. respuestas constantes o estables) que permiten un análisis crı́tico
de los efectos de la intervención, en conductas negativas
versus uso del auxiliar auditivo, en comparación de
conductas y/o comparación de los patrones y conductas
registradas con uso de un auxiliar auditivo entre los
pacientes. El uso del análisis descrito en esta y otras
poblaciones difı́ciles de evaluar demandan mayor estudio
para evaluar su eficacia clı́nica

unaidable or even less-aidable than non-demented and/or
younger patients, a priori? There are several considerations
that must be made in addressing this question.

Loss of hearing with advanced age is well established and
broadly accepted as a fact of life. There is widespread suspicion and some evidence suggesting that age-related deterioration of auditory function may extend centrally (e.g. see Gates et
al, 1990; Cooper & Gates, 1991). Age-related deterioration in
auditory function involves more than decreased sensitivity of
hearing (e.g. see Orchik & Burgess, 1977; Jerger et al, 1991).
Furthermore, diseases such as Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) appear
to be associated with increased difficulty with central auditory
processing (Weinstein & Amsel, 1987; Gates et al, 1995; Fenton,
1986; Strouse et al, 1995; Sinha et al, 1993).
Conventional wisdom dictates that, in the face of central
processing disorders, the appropriateness or value of a hearing
aid (HA) is questionable. Does this mean, however, that patients
with dementia, such as AD patients, should be considered as

1. Are demented patients less well tested and/or managed
clinically in the first place?
2. Is even basic speech recognition performance different for
demented patients, thereby potentially diminishing benefit of
the major goal of amplification */improving speech audibility?
3. Is (are) hearing aid(s) less beneficial in demented patients,
per se, due to putative concomitant central auditory
dysfunction affecting yet other auditory capabilities (for
instance, speech recognition in noise, high-rate speech
processing, and binaural processing)?

ISSN 1499-2027 print
DOI: 10.1080/14992020400022637
# 2005 British Society of Audiology, International
Society of Audiology, and Nordic Audiological Society

John D. Durrant
Department of Communication Science and Disorders, University of Pittsburgh,
Forbes Tower 4033, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
E-mail: durrant@pitt.edu

Received:
October 29, 2003
Accepted:
March 26, 2004

Table 1. Mean speech recognition scores and findings of frequency of hearing aid use in samples of patients with Alzheimer’ s
Disease (AD) and control subjects matched for age and hearing loss, N /10/group. Tests were conducted under earphones (phones),
sound field in quiet (SFQ) and sound field in noise (SFN). Frequencies of hearing loss per group are indicated below
SRT (dB)

Speech Recognition (%)

Group

RE

LE

Phones

SFQ

SFN

AD:
Control:
Hearing Aid User? {n}
Group
AD:
Control:

25
31

28
29

85
82

74
67

49
44

NO
9
4

YES
1
6

[Summary of results from Durrant et al, 1991.]

We have previously evaluated questions 1 and 2 (Durrant et al,
1991), and these and other results from our center are
summarized in Table 1. Results relevant to question 3, however,
are sparse in the literature (Strouse et al, 1995), perhaps belying
a general dearth of clinical information. Indeed, results of
Durrant and his associates suggested substantial neglect of the
hearing handicap in AD patients.
Durrant and coworker’s (1991) findings make it difficult to
understand the lack of attention to hearing health care in AD
patients. Their results derived from a pilot study of 10 AD
patients; these subjects were recruited through the university’s
center for AD research. These cases suffered moderate to severe
AD (Mini Mental State Exam [MMSE], Folstein et al, 1975),
and they were untreated for their suspected hearing impairments
at the time of referral to the hearing clinic. Perhaps counter to
expectations, these subjects participated in hearing tests quite
well, although certainly needing some encouragement at times.
Alzheimer’s Disease patients perform relatively well in highly
structured situations (Holland et al, 1986), as characterized by
hearing tests. For purposes of the study, the subjects were
examined according to standard clinical evaluation to determine
need and probable benefit of amplification. Results (Table 1)
showed nearly identical findings to those of age- and hearingloss-matched subjects in terms of speech recognition ability in
quiet under earphones, in sound field in quiet, and in sound field
with competing noise. The sound field tests were administered
with speech presented essentially at conversational level */60 dB
HL */calibrated at the position of the patient’s ear. The results
for both AD and control groups suggested that at least the
majority of cases in both groups should benefit from amplification. However, the frequency of hearing-aid use showed that,
whereas 6 of the 10 controls already were HA users, only one of
the AD patients was aided, largely as a result of our interaction
with our AD research center in the course of mounting the study.
The Fisher-Exact test showed a statistically significant difference
between groups (p 5/.05). These results indicate that AD patients
can be evaluated efficaciously, at least with skilled patient
testing, yet they are rarely treated for degrees of hearing
impairment for which their age- and hearing-loss-matched
non-AD peers are commonly treated.
Palmer et al (1999) subsequently endeavored to determine
whether AD patients demonstrate behavioral changes suggesting
benefit from HA use. Unlike typical HA studies, the approach
focused on caregiver-reported behaviors of the AD patients. An
inherent problem in the management of hearing disorders in AD

patients is the reliability of information obtained directly from
the patient. Patients with AD commonly exhibit various
‘negative’ behaviors, such as perseverance in manual tasks or
spoken phrases, and often saying ‘no’ to things asked of them to
do. Hearing-impaired AD patients also demonstrate negative
behaviors commonly associated with hearing loss (e.g. turning
the radio/television up too loud or asking for repetition of
phrases spoken to them). Palmer and colleagues examined such
behaviors by asking caregivers to tally target problem behaviors
days before and following intervention with a HA. A typical set
of such data for the behavior of their subject identified as #2 is
shown in Figure 1. These data illustrate that, as might be
expected, there are ups and down in the tally before and after
treatment. Patients’ behavior tallies naturally vary, and caregivers cannot be expected to capture/report every event faithfully, day after day. Still, these and the results in most cases
suggested clear and important trends in patients’ behaviors.
Over the days leading up to treatment, the behavior tallies
were relatively constant or only slowly changing. However, upon
intervention, a fairly rapid change in the count occurred,
resulting in sharp diminutions of the target behaviors (see
Figure 1b). The exact (individual) rate of change appeared to
be a function of two or more variables. The first was the patient’s
reaction to the intervention and perhaps actual perceived
benefit. The other was somewhat of an artifact, albeit consistent
with the standard of care in hearing aid habilitation/rehabilitation. Conventional practice dictates an adaptive schedule of use
of a new instrument, rather than all-out use from day one (see
Figure 1a). Thereafter, tallies were seen to settle toward an
apparent asymptotic value, substantially below the pre-fitting
level (Figure 1). This trend was taken to indicate significant
benefit.
The data presented in Figure 1 (and those of other subjects
and behaviors observed in the original study), were variable
or ‘noisy’, yet the time course of change in behaviors recorded illustrate more systematic trends than previously appreciated. Therefore, it may be fruitful to try to model any
underlying phenomena. Upon inspection, most subjects seemed
to indicate an exponential transition response, both in HA use
and tallies, followed by an asymptotic steady-state response.
Thus, it seemed as if it took some time for the intervention
to take full effect, suggesting exponential-like growth of hearing
aid use and exponentially decaying tallies of events, despite
the prescribed time-table of adaptation (see Figure 1a and
Methods).

32

International Journal of Audiology, Volume 44 Number 1

a
Hours HA Use per Day

18

target

15
12
9
6
3
0

0

20

40

60

80

60

80

Days

b

15

Events per Day

12
9
6
3
0

0

20

40

Days
Figure 1. (a) Tracking of hearing-aid use (hours/day). Hearingaid use commenced on the 47th day of observation. (b) Behavior
counts (events per day) of subject’s claims of ‘can’t hear’, subject
#2. Dashed-line function: linear schedule of hours/day commonly recommended clinically for initial hearing aid use.
Original data from Palmer et al (1999) are re-plotted to conform
to the format of the current report.
It is well known that, in most systems, the output signal value
at a given point in time not only depends on the input signal
value, but also on past input values. Systems with this
characteristic of ‘remembering’ old input signal values, wherein
the input value right now also affects future values of the output,
are called dynamic systems. It is reasonable that the system in the
case of behavior of the AD subject (measured as hours of HA
use per day and tallies of ‘negative events’ per day), has some
kind of memory. On the other hand, it is not reasonable that he/
she, in response to an intervention, immediately adjusts his/her
behavior; rather, ‘old’ input values (even behavior before
intervention) possibly affects behavior at any given time (again,
as manifested both in the HA-use hours and the event tallies per
day). This is reminiscent, specifically, of the response of dynamic
systems to a step or ramp input (here, HA intervention). For
example, in successful hearing aid use there is (at least to some
extent) an accrued value of hearing aid use. The patient neither
starts immediately with full-time use of the instrument, nor is the
final benefit evident from the first-time use.
Analysis of counted behaviors in a singlesubject design: Modeling of hearing-aid
intervention in hearing-impaired patients
with Alzheimer’s disease

The potential relevance of the exponential function here goes
beyond impressions from inspection of the data; nor is it merely
an educated guess. The exponential and closely related functions
often fit nature well or are deemed useful (e.g. the logarithmic
transform popularized in hearing science */the decibel, a
logarithmic transform, and the logarithmic frequency scale).
Exponential functions are inherently adaptive in character, and
neural discharge patterns, sensations, behavior, and other aspects
of nature tend to be more-or-less adaptive, showing asymptotic
growth or decay. An example is developmental effects. Eggermont (1988, 1992) applied exponential fits to the development of
sensory/auditory evoked potentials to show overall similarities,
yet differences, among components per level of the nervous
system, thereby providing a parsimonious view of somewhat
complicated data.
Such approaches to the analysis of data are valuable for
providing useful quantitative outcomes. First, there is the
straight-forward aspect of estimating the central tendencies of
such data. Fitting of such data is generally accomplished
using least-squares methods, by definition a variance-reducing
strategy. Second, the parameters of the function fit can provide
useful measures, such as the time constant. These values, in
turn, may lend themselves to still other mathematical or
statistical analyses. Whatever the specific parameters of interest,
the advantage is found in the prospect of representing rather
complex data by one or a few values. Such an approach can
yield results that permit robust opportunities to both quantify
and simplify noisy real-world data, fostering bases for
critical comparisons among data sets from different subjects/
groups and comparisons across diverse measures that follow
related time-courses. Interpolation within and extrapolation
beyond data sets is another advantage. Lastly, the best-fit
function itself may help to define the nature of the underlying
behavior.
Returning to AD, per se, there has hardly been a groundswell
of interest in the hearing problems of patients with AD, or other
dementias for that matter. Therefore, the literature in this area
remains sparse. Perhaps a perceived obstacle to systemic study of
possible benefits of HA intervention in patients with dementia,
especially AD, is concern for the lack of quantitative bases by
which to evaluate outcomes. Since the characteristic findings of
Palmer et al (1999) suggest a behavior that might be characterized by a mathematical function, the original results of the
study were analyzed further in an effort to develop specific
parameters of quantification of hearing aid use and caregivercounted behaviors. The mathematical model applied and the
results of data fitting suggest an efficacious approach to data
reduction, yielding several parameters as potentially practical
measures. Furtherm