J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
Copyright Ó 2005 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

Vol. 64, No. 8
August 2005
pp. 675–680

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Ectopic Expression of Musashi-1 in Alzheimer Disease
and Pick Disease
Mark A. Lovell, PhD and William R. Markesbery, MD

Abstract

Key Words: Alzheimer disease, Neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), Pick
bodies, tau.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Case Selection and
Neuropathologic Examination

INTRODUCTION
Musashi-1 (Msi-1) is a neural, RNA-binding protein
with 2 conserved RNA recognition motifs with a preference
for G/A(U)nAGU sequences (1). Musashi-1 is highly expressed in neural progenitor cells (NPC) (2–6) and is widely
used as a positive identifier of NPC. In Drosophila, musashi is
required for 2 successive asymmetric divisions of sensory
organ precursor cells (7). In mammals, Msi-1 expression is
enriched in NPC in embryonic central nervous system (3, 6, 8)
and is generally downregulated during neural differentiation.
Msi-1 is not present in newly generated postmitotic neurons (6),
although Msi-1 transcripts have been detected in the early
From the Departments of Chemistry (MAL) and Neurology and Pathology
(WRM) and the Sanders-Brown Center on Aging (MAL, WRM),
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky.
Send correspondence and reprint requests to: Mark A. Lovell, PhD, 135
Sanders-Brown Building, 800 S. Limestone Street, Lexington, KY 40536;
E-mail: malove2@uky.edu
Supported by NIH grants 5-P01-AG05119 and 5-P50-AG05144, and a grant
from the Abercrombie Foundation.

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 64, Number 8, August 2005

Serial sections of paraffin-embedded hippocampus were
obtained from 5 AD, 4 PD, and 5 aged normal control subjects
through the neuropathology core of the University of Kentucky
Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center (UK-ADRC). All subjects had annual mental status testing and physical and neurologic examinations. All AD subjects demonstrated progressive
intellectual decline and met NINCDS-ADRDA Workgroup (18)
criteria for the clinical diagnosis of probable AD. Histopathologic examination of multiple sections of neocortex, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, amygdala, basal ganglia, nucleus
basalis of Meynert, midbrain, pons, medulla, and cerebellum
using hematoxylin and eosin and the modified Bielschowsky
stains along with 10D-5 (for Ab) and a-synuclein immunochemistry were carried out on all subjects. All patients with
AD met accepted criteria for the histopathologic diagnosis of
AD (19, 20), typically demonstrated Braak scores of VI, and
met high likelihood NIA-Reagan Institute criteria for the histopathologic diagnosis of AD. Control subjects were derived
from the longitudinal control population followed by the UKADRC. Control subjects demonstrated Braak scores of I or
II and met NIA/Reagan low likelihood criteria for the
histopathologic diagnosis of AD. All patients with PD showed

675

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 7, 2016

Abnormal accumulation of proteins in filamentous cytoplasmic
inclusions is a hallmark of several neurodegenerative disorders,
including Alzheimer disease (AD) and Pick disease (PD). Musashi-1
(Msi-1), an RNA-binding protein associated with neural progenitor
cells, has been shown by others to increase the accumulation of tau
isoforms in intracellular inclusions in frontotemporal dementia and
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. We investigated the expression of Msi-1 in the hippocampus of AD, PD, and aged normal
control subjects using immunohistochemistry. Comparison of immediately adjacent serial sections stained using the modified
Bielschowsky method and immunostained for Msi-1 showed that
Msi-1 was present in 83 6 6% of neurofibrillary tangle bearing
neurons in AD and 94 6 14% of Pick bodies in PD specimens. Aged
control hippocampus demonstrated virtually no Msi-1 immunostaining. The presence of Msi-1 in a significant percentage of neurons
containing cytoplasmic inclusions in 2 different neurodegenerative
diseases suggests that it may play a role in the pathogenesis of these
lesions.

postnatal brain and in adults in proliferating neuronal or glial
precursor cells of the subventricular zone (SVZ) of the hippocampus and in cells of an astrocyte lineage (6).
The selective expression of Msi-1 in the cytoplasm of
NPC (3, 6) suggests that it may help to maintain cells in an
undifferentiated state during posttranslational gene regulation,
perhaps by translationally repressing synthesis of Numb, a
Notch antagonist (9–11), thus regulating neuronal differentiation (12). In addition, ectopic expression of Msi-1 in N2a
cells and in experimental mouse models led to increased
production and accumulation of tau transcripts containing
exon-10 (13) that is characteristic of intracellular inclusions
observed in the brains of subjects with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (14–17).
Based on these observations, we carried out immunohistochemical studies to determine if Msi-1 protein is observed
in lesion-bearing neurons in the brains of patients with Alzheimer
disease (AD) and Pick disease (PD) compared with aged
normal control subjects.

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 64, Number 8, August 2005

Lovell and Markesbery

typical clinical features of frontotemporal dementia (personality, emotional, and behavioral alterations, decline in executive
function, and subsequent language changes). Frontal and
temporal lobe atrophy was observed at autopsy, and
microscopic examination showed neuron loss, abundant Pick
bodies, and, in most cases, rare balloon neurons. Subject
demographic data are shown in the Table.

Immunohistochemical Staining
and Quantitative Comparisons

TABLE. Subject Demographics
AD
PD
Control

Age (years)

Sex

PMI (hours)

Braak Score

82.8 6 4.2
66.3 6 0.8*
81.0 6 1.5

3 M/2 F
3 M/1 F
3 M/2 F

3.1 6 0.3
9.5 6 3.0*
2.9 6 0.3

6.0 6 0*
1.0 6 1.0
1.6 6 0.2

*, p , 0.05, 2-tailed t-test.
AD, Alzheimer disease; PD, Pick disease; PMI, postmortem interval.

676

Statistical Analysis
Age, postmortem interval (PMI), and Braak scores were
compared using a 2-tailed t-test and ABSTAT software
(AndersonBell, Arvada, CO).
q 2005 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 7, 2016

Serial sections (10 mm) of paraffin-embedded hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus (HPG) from 5 AD, 4 PD, and
5 aged normal control subjects were cut using a Shandon
Finesse microtome, placed on Plus-slides, and rehydrated
through xylene, descending alcohols, and water. Section 1 of
the series was stained using the modified Bielschowsky
method. The adjacent section was used for Msi-1 immunohistochemistry. The sections were rehydrated to water and incubated for 10 minutes in a 0.75-mg/mL trypsin solution
prepared in 150 mM Tris Hcl (pH 7.6) containing 3.3 mM
CaCl2 at 37°C. After 3 rinses in phosphate-buffered saline, the
sections were immunostained using the Dako Envision System (Dako, Carpinteria, CA) per manufacturer’s instructions.
Briefly, endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by
incubation for 5 minutes in 3% hydrogen peroxide/methanol.
After 3 washes in water and Tris-buffered saline containing
0.1% Tween-20 (TTBS), the sections were incubated for
30 minutes in a 1:100 dilution of rabbit polyclonal raised
against amino acids 5 through 21 of human Msi-1 (Chemicon
International, Temecula, CA) in TBS containing 1% fetal
bovine serum. After 3 to 5 washes in TBS containing 0.1%
Tween-20 (TTBS), the sections were incubated in peroxidaselabeled polymer conjugated to goat antirabbit IgG in Tris-HCl
for 30 minutes. The sections were then washed 5 times in
TTBS and color-developed using diaminobenzidine (DAB)
provided in the kit. Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin and eosin, dehydrated through graded ascending alcohols and xylene, and coverslipped.
To verify specificity of the Msi-1 antibody, Western blot
analyses of human NPC isolated from AD brain and crude
homogenates of AD and control HPG were carried out. Cultures of NPC were prepared from representative AD HPG as
previously described (21, 22) and modified by our laboratory
(23). Briefly, frozen specimens of HPG (0.2–1.0 g) were
thawed for 5 minutes in 5 mL of warm, sterile artificial colonystimulating factor (A-CSF) consisting of 124 mM NaCl, 5 mM
KCl, 1.3 mM MgCl2, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 26 mM NaHCO3, 10
mM glucose, 50 mU/mL penicillin, and 10 mg/mL strepto-

mycin (pH 7.3) (Invitrogen Corp., Carlsbad, CA). After
thawing, tissues were placed in sterile plastic bags and
homogenized for 5 minutes using a Stomacher-80 tissue
homogenizer (Seward Medical, London, UK) at medium
speed. After homogenization, the solution was forced sequentially through 120 and 70-mm stainless steel mesh using sterile
Cellector tissue sieves and glass pestles (Thomas Scientific,
Swedesboro, NJ). The resulting solution was mixed with an
equal volume of sterile 90% Percoll (Amersham Biosciences,
Uppsala, Sweden)/10% phosphate-buffered saline and centrifuged at 20,000 3 g for 30 minutes at 18°C to separate tissue
debris from precursor cells as described by Palmer et al (22).
Precursor cells were washed free of Percoll by 3 to 4 rinses in
growth medium consisting of basal serum-free DMEM/F-12
media (Euroclone, Pero, Italy) containing 2 mM glutamine,
0.6% glucose, 6.6 mg/mL putrescine, 6.3 ng/mL progesterone,
5.2 ng/mL sodium selenite, 0.025 mg/mL insulin, 0.1 mg/mL
apo-transferrin, 20 ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF)
(ICN Biomedical, Costa Mesa, CA), and 20 ng/mL basic
fibroblast growth factor (bFGF) (ICN Biomedical). All other
chemicals were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). After a final
wash, cells were resuspended in 1 to 2 mL of growth media,
passed through progressively smaller pipette tips, and plated
into uncoated 6-well culture plates (Costar, Cambridge, MA)
as free-floating single-cell suspensions. The cells were pelleted
by centrifugation at 850 3 g for 10 minutes and homogenized
in 300 mL distilled/deionized water using a micro-Dounce
homogenizer. Homogenates of HPG from representative AD
and control subjects were prepared by homogenizing ;100
mg tissue in 5 mL phosphate-buffered saline using a chilled
Dounce homogenizer. For Western blot analysis, aliquots of
protein (20 mg) were mixed with an equal volume (40 mL
total) of SDS loading buffer containing 15% v/v glycerol,
0.125 M Tris HCl (pH 6.8), 5 mM Na2EDTA, 2% SDS, 1% 2mercaptoethanol, and 0.1% bromophenol blue and boiled 5
minutes. The samples were cooled to room temperature and
separated on a 4% to 20% gradient SDS-PAGE gel (Bio-Rad,
Hercules, CA) and transferred to nitrocellulose. The gels were
blocked overnight in 5% dry milk/TTBS and were probed with
Msi-1 at a dilution of 1:500. To further verify specificity of the
antibody, serial sections of hippocampus from a representative
AD subject were immunostained using the antibody as described previously and also using antibody that had been preincubated with immunizing peptide (APQPGLASPDSPHDPCK)
for 24 hours.
Counts of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and Pick
bodies were performed by taking serial photographs of immediately adjacent Bielschowsky-stained sections and Msi-1
immunostained sections of all of the CA1 and subiculum of
each case using a 203 objective on a Nikon Eclipse E600
microscope. These micrographs were printed on 8" 3 10"
paper and each margin defined so as not to allow any overlap.
Each NFT and Pick body was circled and counted with the
naked eye.

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 64, Number 8, August 2005

Ectopic Expression of Musashi-1 in AD and PD

RESULTS
Subject Demographics
Statistical comparison of age, PMI, and Braak scores
(Table) showed no significant differences in age between AD
and control subjects. Pick disease subjects showed a statistically significant (p , 0.05) lower age (66.3 6 0.8 years) compared with control subjects (82.8 6 4.2 years). Pick disease
subjects showed a significantly higher PMI (9.5 6 3.0 hours)
compared with control subjects (2.9 6 0.3 hours). There were
no other significant differences in PMI. Braak scores were
significantly higher (6 6 0) in AD subjects compared with
control subjects. There were no differences in Braak scores for
PD subjects compared with control subjects.

Verification of Msi-1 Antibody Specificity

Alzheimer Disease
Sections immunostained with Msi-1 antibody revealed
staining of NFT-bearing neurons throughout CA1, subiculum
(Fig. 3 and inset), and the parahippocampal gyrus. Immunostaining was present in typical flame-shaped, globular, and
hemispiked NFT. Rare ghost tangles were Msi-1-positive but
most were not stained. The staining suggested a filamentous
nature of some NFT-bearing neurons, whereas in others,

FIGURE 2. Section of subiculum from a patient with Alzheimer
disease from an area similar to Figure 3 stained with Msi-1
antibody that had been preincubated with the immunizing
peptide. Note lack of staining (2003).

a microgranular appearance was found. In some partially
stained neurons, there was a granular character of the staining
in the cytoplasm. The nuclei of NFT-bearing neurons were not
immunostained. Glial cells were not Msi-1-positive. Although
most senile plaques (SP) were not immunopositive, a few
neurites of rare neuritic SP in the subiculum were Msi-1positive. Neuropil threads did not label with the Msi-1 antibody. Counts of NFT-bearing neurons on immediately adjacent
sections stained with Msi-1 and the modified Bielschowsky
stain showed that Msi-1 immunostained 83 6 6% of NFTbearing neurons stained with the Bielschowsky method.

Pick Disease

FIGURE 1. Western blot analysis of 20-mg specimens of
homogenate from Alzheimer disease (AD) (lane 1) and control
(lane 2) hippocampus/parahippocampal gyrus (HPG) and
neural progenitor cells isolated from AD HPG (lane 3) probed
for Msi-1. Neural progenitor cells from several AD subjects
were combined for Western blot analysis.
q 2005 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

In Pick disease, immunostaining with Msi-1 showed that
abundant Pick bodies were positive in the granule neurons of
the dentate gyrus (Fig. 4), CA1, subiculum (Fig. 5), parahippocampal gyrus, and inferior temporal gyrus. The overall
regional pattern and staining of individual Pick bodies were
similar in adjacent Msi-1 and modified Bielschowsky-stained
sections. Most Pick bodies were seen as discreet, round, densely
staining cytoplasmic inclusions with sharp borders filling much
of the neuron cytoplasm. They were especially abundant in the
granule neurons of the dentate gyrus. In the parahippocampal
and inferior temporal gyri, they were most prominent in lamina
II. The nuclei of neurons containing Pick bodies showed
no immunostaining. Counts of Pick bodies in the CA1 and
subiculum of adjacent sections stained with Msi-1 and the
Bielschowsky stain showed that 94 6 14% of Pick bodies
stained with the modified Bielschowsky stain were immunopositive for Msi-1.

677

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 7, 2016

Western blot analysis of 20-mg aliquots of NPC from
AD brain and crude homogenates of AD and control HPG
probed for Msi-1 showed a predominate band at ;39 kDa
consistent with the molecular weight of Msi-1 in NPC. Analysis of crude homogenate from AD and control HPG showed
the presence of a band at ;39 kDa and a second band above
85 kDa that may represent aggregated protein. Figure 1 demonstrates that Msi-1 expression is most pronounced in NPC,
although there is minimal staining present in crude homogenate of AD brain. To verify specificity of the antibody, sections of a representative AD subject were immunostained
using antibody alone and antibody that had been preincubated
with immunizing peptide. The immunizing peptide completely
blocked Msi-1 immunostaining confirming specificity of the
antibody (Fig. 2).

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 64, Number 8, August 2005

Lovell and Markesbery

DISCUSSION
Based on the observation tha