J Neuropathol Exp Neurol
Copyright Ó 2008 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

Vol. 67, No. 5
May 2008
pp. 428Y434

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Coenzyme Q Induces Tau Aggregation, Tau Filaments,
and Hirano Bodies
Ismael Santa-MarNa, MSc, Gabriel Santpere, MSc, Michael J. MacDonald, MD,
Elena Gomez de Barreda, MSc, Felix Hernandez, PhD, Francisco J. Moreno, PhD,
Isidro Ferrer, MD, PhD, and Jesús Avila, PhD

428

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 67, Number 5, May 2008

Tau aggregation is a common feature of tauopathies such as
Alzheimer disease (AD). In AD, tau assembles into ﬁbrillar
polymers; it may also be present in other aberrant aggregates,
including Hirano bodies. The mechanisms leading to tau polymerization in vivo are not understood. In this study, we found that
coenzyme Q (ubiquinone) facilitates tau aggregation after binding to
tau molecules at the region of the tau molecule involved in selfassembly. Consequently, after tau-tau interactions, this region is
masked in ﬁbrillar tau polymers. Further in vitro studies showed that
ubiquinone facilitates the interaction of tau protein with actin to
form structures that are morphologically similar to Hirano bodies.
Finally, studies in AD brains show that Hirano bodies react with an
antibody raised against ubiquinone, indicating that ubiquinone is a
component of Hirano bodies. Taken together, the in vitro models
and ﬁndings in AD suggest that in the presence of ubiquinone,
Hirano bodies may result from the interaction of actin and other
proteins, including tau.
Key Words: Actin, Alzheimer disease, Coenzyme Q, Hirano
bodies, Tau, Ubiquinone.

INTRODUCTION
Tau is a microtubule-associated protein that in a
monomeric form is very soluble in different buffer conditions. In several neurodegenerative disorders known as
tauopathies (1), however, tau protein forms insoluble aggre-

Copyright @ 2008 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 6, 2016

From the Centro de Biologı́a Molecular ‘‘Severo Ochoa^ (CSIC-UAM),
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (IS-M, EGdB, FH, FJM, JA), Madrid;
Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELLHospital Universitari de Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona (GS, IF),
Hospitalet de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain; Children`s Diabetes Center,
University of Wisconsin Medical School (MJM), Madison, Wisconsin;
and CIBERNED (IF, JA), Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
Send correspondence and reprint requests to: Jesús Avila, PhD, Centro de
Biologı́a Molecular ‘‘Severo Ochoa,^ Facultad de Ciencias, Campus de
Cantoblanco, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049 Madrid, Spain;
E-mail: javila@cbm.uam.es
This work was supported by Grant No. FIS PIo40184 from the Instituto de
Salud Carlos III, by grants from the Plan Nacional (Ministerio de
Educación y Ciencia, Spain) and Comunidad de Madrid, Fundación
Botin, and by an Institutional Grant from Fundación R. Areces.

gates that are stable even in the presence of detergents and
unusual solvents such as 2.5% perchloric acid solution (2).
Tau aggregation resulting in the formation of ﬁbrillar
polymers has been reported to take place in vitro (3). This
polymerization is facilitated by the addition of assembly
inducers such as heparin (4, 5) and other sulfated glycosaminoglycans (6), polyanions (7), fatty acids (8), and quinones
(9). It is not clear, however, whether these in vitro inducers
also induce tau assembly in vivo (10). Tau polymers in the
tauopathies can be present in different brain areas (11), show
different morphologies, and have different composition. For
example, paired helical ﬁlaments (PHFs) and straight ﬁlaments are both found in the brains of AD patients, but they
are morphologically different. Moreover, PHFs in AD but not
Pick bodies are stained with dyes such as thioﬂavin S (12),
indicating different protein composition. In addition, different
tau polymers show different solubilities. Thus, tau ﬁlaments
from patients with progressive supranuclear palsy are more
labile than PHFs isolated from patients with AD (13).
Tau can also be associated with other proteins in other
structures such as Hirano bodies (14), the actin-rich paracrystalline inclusions found in AD (15). Recently, the
formation of structures analogous to Hirano bodies in
transgenic ﬂies that overexpress human tau protein was
reported (16). The actin in Hirano bodies can associate with 2
actin-binding proteins, actin depolymerizing factor and
coﬁlin (17), and/or with tau protein (16). At present,
however, little is known regarding the mechanism underlying
the formation of Hirano bodies in vivo, although several
mechanisms have been suggested (16, 17). Moreover, it is
not known whether different tau-polymerization inducers
might be involved in the formation of different tau polymers
or of copolymers with other proteins. We previously found
that coenzyme Q0 (CoQ0 or ubiquinone) (18) can bind to tau
protein and induce its assembly into ﬁbrillar polymers (9),
and that CoQ0 and other related quinones (19) can bind to
tau not only in noncovalent form but also in a covalent form
(9). The latter observation allows for the search for the
modiﬁed protein or quinone-tau complex in the aberrant tau
structures of tauopathies. Here, we report the presence of
quinones in Hirano bodies, and because ubiquinone binds to
the tau molecule at its self-assembly region, we suggest that
tau-quinone complexes in other tau polymers may be in
masked form.

Abstract

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 67, Number 5, May 2008

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Tau Isolation

Assembly of Tau Protein Into Filaments
Filaments were grown by vapor diffusion in hanging
drops in the standard way used for protein crystallization as
previously described (5). In a typical experiment, 0.5 to 2 Kg
of protein tau was resuspended in 10 to 15 KL of buffer A
(0.1 mol/L of 2-[N-morpholino]ethanesulfonic acid [pH 6.4],
0.5 mmol/L of MgCl2, and 2 mmol/L of EGTA) containing
50 mmol/L of NaCl and 1 mmol/L of CoQ0. The reservoir
contained 0.2 mol/L of NaCl in buffer A 5. Filaments were
obtained after incubation for 4 days at 4-C. The samples were
visualized by electron microscopy as previously described
(22). Electron micrographs were obtained at a magniﬁcation
of 80,000 on Kodak SO-163 ﬁlm. Micrographs were
digitized using an Eikonix IEEE-488 camera with a pixel
size equivalent to 7 Å in the specimen plane. Processing and
measurements were performed using the Digital Micrograph
2.1 software from Gatan, Inc. (Pleasanton, CA). Several
standards were used for the control of the measurements.
Alternatively, tau polymers were stained using a tau antibody
(ab) and visualized by immunoﬂuorescence as previously
described (23).

with a Zeiss Axiovert 200 ﬂuorescent microscope. Fluorescence images were captured through a 100 oil-immersion
objective on a high-resolution charge-coupled device camera
(SPOT RT Slider, Diagnostic).

Mass Spectrometry Analysis
Mass spectrometry was performed following the
method of Reynolds et al (25).

PHF Isolation
Brain samples supplied by Dr. Ravid (Netherlands
Brain Bank, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) from AD patients
were used to isolate PHFs. They were isolated by preparation
of sarkosyl-insoluble extracts, as previously described (26).

Gel Electrophoresis and Western Blot Analysis
Tau protein samples obtained after 0 to 24 hours of
incubation of tau protein in the presence of 1 mmol/L of CoQ0
were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis. Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis was performed according to the procedure of
Laemmli on 10% gels (27). The gels were then stained with
Coomassie blue R-250. Alternatively, in a similar experiment, tau samples incubated with CoQ0 were analyzed by
Western blot using anti-tau (7.51) and anti-CoQ0 (73903)
antibodies. Densitometry of the bands was determined using
a BioRad GS740 densitometer.

Immunoelectron Microscopy
Immunoelectron microscopy was performed after
adsorption of the samples to electron microscopy carboncoated grids and incubation with the ﬁrst ab (diluted 1/40) for 1
hour at room temperature. After extensive washing with PBS,
the grids were incubated with the secondary ab (diluted 1/40)
conjugated with 5-nm-diameter gold particles (Biocell Laboratories, Inc., Rancho Dominguez, CA). Finally, the samples
were negatively stained and observed as previously described.

Human Tissue
Tissue samples were from 2 men and 1 woman aged 76,
68, and 74 years, respectively, with AD. The 3 patients had a
progressive and severe cognitive impairment. The cause of
death was respiratory failure in 2 cases and unknown in the

Assembly of Hirano Body-Like Structures

Tau protein (0.5Y2 Kg), actin (1 Kg; Cytoskeleton,
Denver, CO), and CoQ0 (1 mmol/L) were mixed and grown
using the hanging drop method as previously described. After
4 days of incubation, samples were analyzed by immunoﬂuorescence using a modiﬁed version of the previously
described protocol (23). Brieﬂy, a suspension of the samples
was adsorbed to gelatinized glass slides and then allowed to
dry at 37-C. The protein adsorbed to the slide was processed
for double-immunoﬂuorescence experiments with antibodies
raised against tau (Tau-5; Calbiochem, Darmstadt, Germany)
and CoQ0 (73903, a kind gift of Dr. McDonald et al [24]),
and with phodamine phalloidin (1/300; Sigma, Madrid,
Spain) to stain polymerized actin, which is incubated at the
same time of secondary antibodies. Samples were imaged

Ó 2008 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

FIGURE 1. Tau assembly in the presence of coenzyme Q0.
Electron microscopy micrographs of tau polymers assembled
in the absence (A) and presence (B) of coenzyme Q0 are
shown. Scale bars = 0.2 Km.

429

Copyright @ 2008 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 6, 2016

Expression and isolation of recombinant protein htau
42 (the longest human isoform of tau expressed in the CNS)
was performed as previously described (20, 21). Brieﬂy,
after induced expression of tau in Escherichia coli, protein
puriﬁcation was performed by a protocol involving a heat
resistance step in a buffer containing 100 mmol/L of
Tris, pH 7.5, 0.5 mmol/L of MgCl2, 1 mmol/L of EGTA,
1 mmol/L of 2-mercaptoethanol, 100 mmol/L of NaCl and
protease inhibitors: 2 mmol/L of phenylmethanesulfonyl
ﬂuoride, 10 Kg/ml of aprotinin, 10 Kg/ml of leupeptin, and
10 Kg/ml of pepstatin. This step involves a treatment at
100-C for 5 minutes. The soluble protein was isolated after
centrifugation, and ammonium sulfate was added. The
precipitated fraction between 25% and 50% was taken.
The precipitated protein was resuspended in PBS and
chromatographed on DEAE Sephacel-R, equilibrated in
PBS, and the protein was eluted stepwise using 1 mol/L of
NaCl in PBS.

Coenzyme Q, Tau, and Hirano Bodies

Santa-MarNa et al

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 67, Number 5, May 2008

Immunohistochemistry
Following the EnVision + system peroxidase procedure
(Dako, Carpinteria, CA), 5-Km-thick dewaxed sections of the
hippocampus from AD cases and controls were processed for
immunohistochemistry. After incubation with methanol and
H2O2 in PBS and normal serum, the sections were incubated
with monoclonal ab to A-actin (Sigma) diluted 1:2500, and
rabbit polyclonal anti-CoQ0 73903 was used at a dilution of
1:200. The peroxidase reaction was visualized with diaminobenzidine and H2O2. Control of the immunostaining
included omission of the primary ab; no signal was obtained
after incubation with only the secondary ab. Sections were
counterstained with hematoxylin.

Double Labeling Immunoﬂuorescence and
Confocal Microscopy

third because the death was not observed. The postmortem
delay was 6 and 4 hours and no more than 7 hours in the third
case. Neuropathologic analyses were performed on selected
parafﬁn sections of 25 different brain areas immunostained
for A-amyloid 1-40 and 1-42, phospho-tau AT8, 3Rtau and
4Rtau, >-synuclein, ubiquitin, >B-crystallin, TAR DNA
binding protein 43, glial ﬁbrillary acidic protein, and CD68.
The diagnoses of these cases were Braak and Braak AD
stages VC and VIC. No other abnormalities, including >synuclein or TAR DNA binding protein 43 inclusions, were
observed in these cases. Small-vessel disease mainly affecting the striatum was present in 1 case.
Cases used as controls were 3 women aged 65, 69, and
72 years with no neurologic impairment. The postmortem
delay was between 3 and 6 hours. The brains were examined
by studying the same corresponding regions with similar
immunostaining protocol. No neuropathologic abnormalities,
other than mild small-vessel disease in 1 case, were found in
the control cases.

430

FIGURE 3. Localization of coenzyme Q0 (CoQ0) bound to tau
molecule. The major binding sites of CoQ0 on tau protein were
analyzed by nanoelectrospray. (A) Tau peptide (used as control
without CoQ0 incubation) and its fragmentation peaks. (B) The
main modiﬁcation by CoQ0, sequence, and fragmentation
peaks. Essentially, lysine 321 of the whole tau protein is
modiﬁed. Analysis of the reaction of assembled tau polymers
with antibody (ab) raised against tau (ab 134) (C) and CoQ0
(73903) (D). Arrows show gold particles. Scale bar = 200 nm.
Ó 2008 American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc.

Copyright @ 2008 by the American Association of Neuropathologists, Inc. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.

Downloaded from http://jnen.oxfordjournals.org/ by guest on June 6, 2016

FIGURE 2. Coenzyme Q0 (CoQ0) induces the formation of
covalently linked tau aggregates. (A) Tau protein (0. 5 Kg/KL)
was mixed with 1 mmol/L CoQ0, and the mixture was
incubated for 0 to 24 hours at 37-C. After that, the protein
was characterized by gel electrophoresis, followed by Coomassie blue staining. The left lane shows the electrophoretic
mobility markers. (B) Western blot analysis of the tau
monomer species incubated in the presence (h) or absence
(r) of CoQ0, as indicated in (A). (C) Just like (B), but the
reaction with antibody raised against ubiquinone is tested.

Dewaxed sections of the hippocampus were stained
with a saturated solution of Sudan black B (Merck) for 30
minutes to block the autoﬂuorescence of lipofuscin granules
present in nerve cell bodies, rinsed in 70% ethanol, and
washed in distilled water. The sections were then incubated at
4-C overnight with the mouse anti-A-actin (Sigma) at a
dilution of 1:2500, and rabbit polyclonal anti-CoQ0 73903
(24) was used at a dilution of 1:500. After washing in PBS,
the sections were incubated in the dark with the cocktail of
secondary antibodies and then diluted in the same vehicle
solution as the primary antibodies for 45 minutes at room
temperature. Secondary antibodies were Alexa488 anti-rabbit

J Neuropathol Exp Neurol  Volume 67, Number 5, May 2008

Coenzyme Q, Tau, and Hirano Bodies

sealed, and dried overnight. Sections were examined with a
Leica TCS-SL confocal microscope.

RESULTS
CoQ0-Tau Binding and Aggregation

FIGURE 4. Reaction of tau and coenzyme Q0 (CoQ0) antibodies with paired helical ﬁlaments from Alzheimer disease
patients. (A) Isolated paired helical ﬁlaments were incubated
with an antibody (ab) raised against tau (ab 134). (B) Just like
(A), but in this case, an ab raised against CoQ0 (73903) was
tested. Scale bar = 20 nm.

Localization of CoQ0 Bound to Tau Molecule
Coenzyme Q0 was bound to tau protein, and the
complex was isolated by gel electrophoresis (Fig. 2). The

FIGURE 5. Coenzyme Q0 (CoQ0) is present in Hirano bodies.
Single label immunohistochemistry shows CoQ0 immunoreactivity in elongated and ovoid-shaped neuronal and
perineural bodies (arrows) in the CA1 area of the hippocampus
in Alzheimer disease. Parafﬁn section with