ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Rate of Cognitive Change Measured by Neuropsychologic
Test Performance in 3 Distinct Dementia Syndromes
Alissa H. Wicklund, PhD,* Alfred Rademaker, PhD,*w Nancy Johnson, PhD,*
Bing Bing Weitner, MS,*w and Sandra Weintraub, PhD*

Abstract: Progressive decline in cognition is a hallmark feature
of dementia, and the rate and proﬁle of cognitive decline
has been well characterized in Alzheimer disease (AD). Less is
known about decline in cognition over time in other forms of
dementia such as the behavioral variant of frontotemporal
dementia (FTD) and primary progressive aphasia (PPA). The
present study examined rate of cognitive decline across domains
of memory, language, and executive function measured by
neuropsychologic tests, in AD (n = 84), FTD (n = 66), and PPA
(n = 44). Patients were in the mild stages of dementia, with
comparable duration of illness at the baseline evaluation. A best
linear unbiased predictor (BLUP) analysis was used in which the
slope of the relationship between a cognitive measure and time
was estimated for each person. AD subjects demonstrated a
ﬂoor eﬀect on measures of memory at baseline and a decline on
measures of language and executive functioning over time. FTD
showed the greatest decline over time on the Mini-Mental State
Examination, executive functioning, and naming. PPA patients
demonstrated prominent decline on language measures, verbal
memory measures, and attention. Results suggest that the proﬁle
of rate of change over time has unique features on the basis of
the type of dementia syndrome. However, there is overlap in the
proﬁles of decline likely inﬂuenced by the overlap in cognitive
constructs measured by neuropsychologic tests. The comparison
of the rate of decline in FTD and PPA may also reﬂect the
neuroanatomic overlap in these syndromes over time.
Key Words: cognitive change, Alzheimer disease, frontotemporal
dementia, primary progressive aphasia
(Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2007;21:S70–S78)

O

ne common feature among neurodegenerative diseases that cause dementia is the progressive nature
of cognitive decline. In Alzheimer disease (AD), this is

From the *Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and
Neurology, Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center;
and wDepartment of Preventive Medicine, Feinberg School of
Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL.
Supported in part by an Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center grant
(AG13854) from the National Institute on Aging to Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, and a grant from the National Alzheimer’s
Coordinating Center (S. Weintraub, PI).
Reprints: Alissa H. Wicklund, PhD, Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center, 320 E. Superior, Searle 11-465, Chicago, IL
60611 (e-mail: a-wicklund@northwestern.edu).
Copyright r 2007 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

S70

characterized by initially focal and progressive memory
loss, and eventual deﬁcits in other cognitive domains. In
the spectrum of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) associated with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD),
language or behavior changes may be the initial clinical
symptom, with gradual decline and then subsequent
spread to other cognitive domains.1 More speciﬁcally,
FTD is broadly classiﬁed into 2 variants: one in which
there are initially focal and progressive behavioral and
personality changes (FTD) and the second in which the
primary symptom is aphasia. The aphasic variant is
referred to as primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and the
aphasia can take any form including agrammatic,
semantic, and logopenic.2
The tracking, staging, and progression of AD has
been well characterized3–7 as there is good clinical
diagnostic accuracy, a focus on identifying and studying
individuals in the very earliest stages (ie, those with Mild
Cognitive Impairment), and batteries designed to assess
even the most severely impaired patients (ie, Severe
Impairment Battery8). By contrast, the rate and pattern of
cognitive decline have not been well characterized in the
dementia syndromes associated with FTLD, particularly
comparing the language and behavioral variants. This is
due in part to methodological challenges. First, there is
diﬃculty accurately identifying the diagnosis in early
stages, with the use of neuropsychologic tests in
individuals with aphasia or executive function deﬁcits,
each of which can inﬂuence test performance in other
primary domains being assessed, such as memory.
Second, severe impairment during the disease course
further limits test-taking abilities in these patients.
Rascovsky and colleagues9 compared cognitive and
functional decline in autopsy conﬁrmed cases of FTD and
AD matched for age, education, and baseline MiniMental State Examination (MMSE) scores. Decline was
measured by subtracting scores between visits and
dividing by the number of years between visits to
calculate an annualized rate of change. Their results
showed that MMSE scores declined faster in FTD, as did
scores on measures of activities of daily living. Binetti and
colleagues10 modeled change in cognitive test performance versus duration of illness and age using linear
regression models in individuals with autopsy conﬁrmed
Pick disease (PcD; both behavioral and language variants
clinically) and AD. They showed that patients with PcD
declined faster than those with AD on neuropsychologic

Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord  Volume 21, Number 4, October–December 2007

Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord  Volume 21, Number 4, October–December 2007

tests of language (naming and category ﬂuency), global
cognitive impairment, and activities of daily living. There
were no diﬀerences in rate of decline between the groups
on measures of reasoning, attention, visuospatial processing, or immediate and delayed recall. One limitation in
that study is a lack of diﬀerentiation between the
language and behavioral variants of FTD, potentially
conﬂating diﬀerences between proﬁles of cognitive decline
in these groups.
Two studies have examined the rate of cognitive
decline in FTD and AD using the MMSE. In one,
Pasquier and colleagues11 used linear regression models
to examine decline in MMSE and survival rate, modeled
against time since disease onset, in individuals with the
behavioral variant of FTD and AD. Patients with PPA
were not included in this analysis. They showed a greater
mean annual decline for AD patients, but noted that there
was an abrupt decline in MMSE scores for FTD patients
when these individuals became mute and more apathetic.
They concluded that the MMSE is not an appropriate
measure to examine cognitive decline in FTD. In a second
study, Chow and colleagues12 also analyzed the rate of
the decline on the MMSE, but divided the items by
cognitive domain. They compared individuals with AD,
and those with language and behavior variants of FTD.
They calculated the annualized rate of change by using
the ﬁrst and last visit scores for each subject divided by
the number of years between visits. In contrast to the
Pasquier study, this study demonstrated a greater annualized rate of decline in FTD compared with AD. In
addition, individuals with both the behavior and language
variants of FTD declined faster on the language items on
the MMSE, the AD subjects declined faster on memory
items, and FTD subjects showed better constructional
praxis than the AD group. There were no diﬀerences in
the attention subscore among groups.
Finally, a recent study by Blair and colleagues13
examined language decline over the course of 2 years in
AD, FTD (behavioral variant; FTD-bv), and PPA on the
Western Aphasia Battery (WAB). Using a repeated
measures analysis of variance, results showed that FTDbv and PPA declined faster on language measures,
represented by the Aphasia Quotient of the WAB, relative
to a more gradual decline in AD. Individuals with PPA
showed greater language impairment at baseline than
FTD-bv, but overtime the FTD-bv showed a similar rate
and pattern of decline as the PPA subjects. They
concluded that the eventual overlap in language impairment in PPA and FTD-bv is indicative of the overlap in
the disorders, at clinical, neuroanatomic, and neuropathologic levels.
In general, comparisons of rate of decline in FTD
and PPA have been limited to small studies primarily
using the MMSE, and with mixed results. The study by
Binetti and colleagues10 used a more comprehensive
neuropsychologic test battery, but failed to diﬀerentiate
between the language and behavioral variants in their
group of individuals with autopsy conﬁrmed PcD. In
addition, methodological problems exist with the aforer 2007 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

Cognitive Change in Dementia

mentioned analyses. For example, many of the studies
used annualized rate of change analysis (subtracting ﬁrst
from last visit scores and dividing by time between the
visits). However, this method does not fully use all
available data points in between ﬁrst and last visits.
Studies have shown variability in the rate of decline in
FTD and PPA on the basis of the factors such as age of
onset and sex.14 The goal of the present study was to
examine the rate of cognitive change in individuals with
AD, the behavioral variant of FTD, and PPA. The
method of best linear unbiased predictors (BLUPs)15,16
was used to examine rate of change on neuropsychologic
tests of memory, attention, executive function, language,
and memory. The BLUPs analysis uses all available data
points for each subject, and creates an estimated slope
separately for each person. The beneﬁt is that the BLUPs
estimate an annualized rate of change for each subject on
the basis of all available longitudinal data from that
subject, rather than only the ﬁrst and last visits.
We hypothesized that (1) all subject groups would
show decline in cognition over time due to the progressive
nature of neurodegenerative disease, and (2) the proﬁle of
decline would diﬀer among the subject groups. Speciﬁcally, AD subjects were hypothesized to show greater
decline on measures related to memory abilities, with
FTD subjects showing most impairment over time on
tests reliant on attention and executive function. Finally,
language was hypothesized to be the most prominent
cognitive domain to decline in PPA. In addition,
diﬀerences were expected in the proﬁle of decline across
all measures when comparing performance between PPA
and FTD, due to diﬀerences in their early clinical
presentation (ie, language vs. behavior and prominent
executive function deﬁcits, respectively).

METHODS
Data were analyzed from 194 patients with a clinical
diagnosis of AD (n = 84), behavioral variant FTD
(n = 66), or PPA (n = 44) and 228 healthy elderly
cognitively normal control subjects (NC) (Table 1). All
subjects were participants in the Clinical Core of the
Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer’s Disease Center
(CNADC) at Northwestern University, and had been
enrolled on a protocol approved by the Institutional
Review Board. All subjects and caregivers had given
written informed consent. Participants enrolled in the
Clinical Core underwent a comprehensive neurologic and
neuropsychologic evaluation and those enrolled after
September 2005 were examined according to the methods
of the Uniform Data Set (UDS)17 and additional
procedures speciﬁc to the CNADC. Inclusion criteria
for all subjects in this study included an MMSE >17
(mild to moderate dementia). Individuals with AD were
diagnosed by a neurologist in a clinical evaluation and
met National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorder and Stroke-Alzheimers’s Disease and
Related Disorder Association diagnostic criteria for
probable AD.18 The behavioral variant of FTD was

S71

Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord  Volume 21, Number 4, October–December 2007

Wicklund et al

TABLE 1. Demographic Summary for NC, AD, FTD, and PPA Subjects
NC (n = 228)
% Male
Age at baseline
Education (y)
Duration of illness at baseline (y)

FTD (n = 66)

PPA (n = 44)

Mean

SEM

Mean

AD (n = 84)
SEM

Mean

SEM

Mean

SEM

P

Pairwise*

50
68.9
15.8
NA

0.5
0.2
NA

32
73.7
14.5
4.2

1.0
0.3
0.3

40
62.3
14.8
3.4

1.2
0.3
0.3

25
66.9
15.5
4.4

1.0
0.4
0.5

<0.0001
<0.0001
0.0003
NS

1256
12456
23

*Code for pairwise tests (Tukey) -1: NC diﬀerent from PPA; 2: NC diﬀerent from FTD; 3: NC diﬀerent from AD; 4: PPA diﬀerent from FTD; 5: PPA diﬀerent from
AD; 6: FTD diﬀerent from AD.
NA indicates not applicable; NS, not signiﬁcant.

diagnosed by a neurologist in individuals who fulﬁlled
criteria outlined by the most recent work-group consensus
statement on frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and was
also based on performance on neuropsychologic tests in a
comprehensive clinical evaluation.1 A diagnosis of PPA
was also based on performance on a comprehensive
clinical evaluation, including neuropsychologic evaluation, and the criteria outlined by Mesulam.19 All subtypes
of PPA, that is agrammatic, logopenic, and semantic,2
were included and subgroups were not diﬀerentiated for
the purpose of this study. Once enrolled, patients were
followed on an annual basis.

Neuropsychologic Test Measures
Participants were administered a battery of neuropsychologic tests annually as part of their Clinical Core
enrollment. The tests were a combination of measures
speciﬁed in the UDS17 and additional measures selected
to provide a comprehensive assessment across multiple
cognitive domains. The test battery included the Logical
Memory and Visual Reproduction subtests of the
Wechsler Memory Scale—Revised (WMS—R)20; the
Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer’s
Disease (CERAD) battery (word list learning, recall,
recognition hits, and recognition false positives; category
ﬂuency and constructions subtests)21; Controlled Oral
Word Association Test (COWA; F,A,S)22,23; Boston
Naming Test (BNT)24; Trail Making Test, Parts A and
B25; Visual-Verbal Test26 abbreviated 10-item version27;
and the MMSE.28 Over time, adjustments had been made
to the clinical core battery for reasons of length,
comprehensiveness, and to conform to new priorities of
the center over time. As such, not all subjects received all
tests. Measures that had been administered to an ample
number of subjects to provide adequate sample size for
data analysis were subsequently used. These criteria
resulted in the exclusion of the following tests from
analysis: WMS-R subtests, CERAD constructions, and
the Visual-Verbal Test—abbreviated 10 items. Follow-up
data were available for up to 8 years for AD and FTD
subjects, and 3 years for PPA subjects.

Data Analysis
One-way analysis of variance was used to examine
diﬀerences in baseline test scores. Scores were analyzed at
baseline to identify possible ﬂoor eﬀects (ie, scores that
approached severe impairment even on initial testing),

S72

which would aﬀect the ability to demonstrate decline in
test performance over time. Rate of change was compared
across groups using BLUPs.16 The analysis approach was
similar to that described by Gould et al15 in a study
examining the rate of cognitive change in individuals with
AD. By that method, the slope of the relationship
between a cognitive measure and time was estimated for
each person. As described above, the BLUP estimate
represents an annualized rate of change for each subject
using all available longitudinal data from that subject,
rather than just the ﬁrst and last visits. The slope
represents the decrease in the mean score per year,
assuming a linear trend across the follow-up period.
Negative values represent a decrease, and positive values
represent an increase. These estimates were then subjected
to a 1-way analysis of covariance to analyze diﬀerences
across the 4 diagnostic groups, with age as a covariate.
Signiﬁcant diﬀerences were subjected to pairwise comparisons among the groups using the Tukey-Kramer
method.29 Tests that measure speed of performance (eg,
number of seconds to complete the Trail Making Test)
are reported in a positive direction with higher times
indicating a slowing of reaction time.

RESULTS
Ta