Current Immunology Reviews, 2005, 1, 139-155

139

Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s Disease: Potential Problems and Possible
Solutions
David H. Cribbs1 and Michael G. Agadjanyan*,2
1The Institute for Brain Aging and Dementia and Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine,

Irvine, CA 92697-4540, USA
2The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Huntington Beach, CA 92649, USA

Abstract: The primary component of senile plaques is the β-amyloid peptide (Aβ), and the amyloid cascade
hypothesis proposes that this putative neuropathological peptide is a causal factor in the onset and
progression of Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Many of the strategies currently being investigated as therapies for
AD are aimed at reducing the level of Aβ in the brain or blocking the assembly of the peptide into potentially
pathological forms. Immunization of APP/Tg mice with fibrillar Aβ, induced anti-Aβ antibodies, which
reduced Aβ plaque deposition and neuritic dystrophy, astrogliosis in the brains of APP/Tg mice, and
diminished learning deficits in these mice. The first clinical trial was halted, however, when 6% of the
participants developed some degree of meningoencephalitis. Preliminary analysis of the first clinical trial has
produced some encouraging results including a reduction in plaque load and attenuation of cognitive decline
in some vaccinated patients. In this review, we discuss the current status of Aβ-immunotherapy and offer our
analysis of the probable cause of the failure of the clinical trial. We believe that the development of safe and
effective Aβ-immunotherapy requires selection of an antigen that will induce an adequate anti-Aβ antibody
response in the absence of potentially adverse self T cell- mediated events.

Keywords: Alzheimer’s disease, β-amyloid peptide, Aβ-immunotherapy, anti-Aβ antibody, T cell response, epitope vaccine.
IMMUNOTHERAPY FOR AD USING Aβ42 VACCINE:
LESSONS FROM PRE-CLINICAL AND CLINICAL
TRIALS

immunogen that induces an adequate anti-Aβ antibody
response, without generation of potentially harmful anti-Aβ
T cell responses.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of
dementia in the elderly and is characterized by a progressive
loss of memory and general cognitive decline. The
neuropathological features of the disease include
neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), deposition of β-amyloid (Aβ)
in senile plaques, and neuronal loss in affected brain regions
[1]. The Aβ peptide is cleaved from the amyloid precursor
protein (APP) by β- and γ -secretases [2-4] and is thought to
have a central role in the onset and progression of AD,
which has led to the amyloid cascade hypothesis [5, 6].
Accordingly, many of the strategies currently being proposed
as therapies for AD are aimed at reducing the level of Aβ in
the brain or blocking the assembly of the peptide into
pathological forms. One potentially powerful strategy for
reducing the level of Aβ in the brain is immunotherapy, in
which antibodies specific for Aβ facilitate the clearance of
amyloid deposits. Over the last several years, a number of
interesting reviews have been published on immunotherapy
for AD [7-17]. In this report, we will discuss the current
status of Aβ-immunotherapy, and will attempt to
demonstrate that the development of safe and effective
immunotherapy for AD is feasible by selection of an

In 1999, Schenk and colleagues published a very
intriguing paper [18]. They reported that a vaccine that
contained fibrillar Aβ, when injected into mice genetically
engineered to develop AD-like amyloid plaques in the brain
(APP-transgenic mice), prevented the deposition of Aβ, and
the development of dystrophic neurites and astrogliosis in
their brains. More importantly, when older mice that had
already developed Aβ plaques were immunized with Aβpeptide, the Aβ plaques were cleared from the brain. Thus,
both protective (prophylactic) and therapeutic vaccinations§
were effective in APP- transgenic mice (APP/Tg) [18]. Other
researchers have reproduced and extended the original
findings to include studies showing that immunotherapy
with Aβ can block the loss of cognitive abilities in APP/Tg
mice as they accumulate Aβ with aging [19, 20]. Subsequent
studies using passive transfer of anti-Aβ antibodies,
basically demonstrated the same reduction of AD-like
pathology in APP/Tg mice [21-23]. These results clearly
demonstrated that anti-Aβ-specific antibodies are sufficient
for clearing amyloid deposits from the brains of APP/Tg
mice. Collectively, the experimental data generated in
animal models suggested that the Aβ-immunotherapy
approach was worth pursuing as a therapeutic strategy for
treating AD. There were no reports of any adverse
autoimmune or inflammatory responses in peripheral tissues
or in the brains of APP/Tg mice immunized with fibrillar

*Address correspondence to this author at the Institute for Molecular
Medicine, 16371 Gothard Street, H, Huntington Beach, CA 92647-3652,
USA; Tel: 714-596-7821; Fax: 714-596-3791;
E-mail: magadjanyan@immed.org

§ A therapeutic vaccine (active or passive immunotherapy) is a vaccine

used for the treatment of a disease rather than for its prevention (the latter
is referred to as a prophylactic or protective vaccine).

Both authors contributed equally to this work.
1573-3955/05 $50.00+.00

© 2005 Bentham Science Publishers Ltd.

140

Current Immunology Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 2

Aβ42. The only adverse event observed was the increased
incidence of cerebral hemorrhage detected in very old
hemorrhage-prone APP/Tg-23 mice injected with high levels
of an anti-Aβ monoclonal antibody [24]. More recently, it
was demonstrated that passive immunization with anti-Aβ
antibodies directed to aa 1-5, also resulted in significantly
increased microhemorrhage [25]. There were no documented
reports of APP/Tg models developing cerebral hemorrhages
in response to active immunization, however. Thus, based
on the impressive results in APP/Tg mice and the lack of
adverse autoimmune-type reactions to Aβ-immunotherapy in
several animal models including mice, rabbits, guinea pigs,
and monkeys, Elan Inc. and Wyeth Inc. began clinical trials
on AD patients with their AN-1792 vaccine, which consisted
of fibrillar Aβ42 as the immunogen and a strongly Th1
polarizing adjuvant, QS21.
The Phase I safety study on a small number of
individuals with mild to moderate AD did not produce any
adverse events in response to active immunization with the
AN-1792 vaccine. Unfortunately, the phase IIa portion of the
AN-1792 immunotherapy vaccine trial was halted, because
approximately 6% of the volunteers developed symptoms of
an adverse inflammatory response in the brain [7, 26-29].
The follow -up studies, however, demonstrated that despite
the termination of the clinical trial, some patients may have
benefited from vaccination. For example, AD patients from
the Zurich cohort of the AN-1792 clinical trial that generated
antibodies binding to Aβ plaques, showed significantly
slower rates of decline in cognitive function and activities of
daily living. The beneficial effects were also observed in two
patients that suffered transient attacks of meningoencephalitis. Interestingly, the degree of protection was
correlated with the titer of the antibodies binding to βamyloid plaques, but not to Aβ peptide attached to ELISA
plates [28]. Patients who responded to vaccination by
producing anti-Aβ plaque-specific antibodies, but not
patients that did not produce such antibodies, showed
stabilization of cognitive functions over 12 months [30].
Recently, these data were confirmed after further monitoring
of 300 patients who received the AN-1792 vaccine. The
results reported at the 9th International Conference on AD
and Related Disorders showed that vaccinated patients with
mild or moderate AD produced anti-Aβ IgG antibodies (titer
1:2200) and exhibited significant improvement in cognitive
function and activities of daily living*. There were also
some very promising changes in the neuropathology, which
was consistent with much of the data generated in preclinical trials using APP/Tg mice. More specifically, the
first case report from the AN-1792 clinical trial [33] showed
that extensive areas of the neocortex were largely free of Aβ
deposits. These same areas were free of dystrophic neurites
and activated astrocytes, but did contain neurofibrillary
*Gilman S, Koller M, Black RS,

et al. Neuropsychological, CSF and
neuropathological effects of A-beta immunotherapy (AN1792) of
Alzheimer's disease in an interrupted trial. In: The 9th International
Conference on Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders; 2004 July 1722; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2004. [31];
Fox NC, Black RS, Gilman S, et al. Effects of amyloid-beta
immunotherapy (AN1792) on MRI measures of brain, ventricle and
hippocampal volumes in Alzheimer's disease. In: The 9th International
Conference on Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders; 2004 July 1722; Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; 2004. [32]

Cribbs and Agadjanyan

tangles, neuropil threads, and cerebral amyloid angiopathy
(CAA). These remarkable results provide the first evidence
that anti-Aβ antibodies may significantly reduce Aβ
pathology in AD patients. The second case report was
similar, demonstrating focal atypically low levels of diffuse
and neuritic Aβ-plaques, but not regression of tau pathology
in neurofibrillary tangles and threads, nor improvement of
CAA [34]. Therefore, data generated from the AN-1792
clinical trials suggest that Aβ-immunotherapy may have a
significant impact on the progression of AD. AD
immunotherapy is still in the early stages of development
and will likely benefit from a thorough analysis of the
results from the first clinical trail, and from gaining a better
understanding of the anti-Aβ antibody-mediated plaque
clearance mechanisms by pursuing additional studies in
APP/Tg models.
MECHANISMS
OF
ANTIBODY-MEDIATED
CLEARANCE OF CEREBRAL EXTRACELLULAR
Aβ DEPOSITS
Both active and passive vaccinations have been shown to
be effective in mouse models of AD, thus it is clear that the
therapeutic effect is based on anti-Aβ humoral immune
responses. The mechanism underlying this therapeutic effect,
however, remains unclear. Two major mechanisms have now
been proposed to account for the effect of anti-Aβ antibodies
on the number of Aβ plaques in the brain following
immunotherapy. The first mechanism is based on the
clearance of Aβ from the brain by anti-Aβ antibodies that
cross the blood brain barrier (BBB) [7, 21]. In the second
mechanism, antibodies bind up only the free peripheral Aβ
in the blood, which results in a net efflux of Aβ out of the
brain (peripheral sink model) [16, 22, 23].
CLEARANCE OF Aβ FROM THE BRAIN BY ANTIAβ ANTIBODIES THAT CROSS THE BBB
Experiments in APP/Tg models have been informative,
although not definitive, with regard to the antibodymediated mechanism/s involved in blocking cerebral Aβ
accumulation [21, 22]. Passive administration of anti-Aβ
monoclonal antibodies has established the fact that
antibodies alone are sufficient for reducing amyloid
deposition in APP/Tg mice, thus, demonstrating that the
clearance of Aβ is not T cell dependent [21, 22]. Bard et al.
showed that passive immunization resulted in a small
amount of antibodies against Aβ in the central nervous
system of APP/Tg mice [21]. Therefore, some anti-Aβ
antibodies do cross the BBB and bind directly to amyloid
plaques. It is likely that such binding facilitates clearance of
antigen-antibody complexes by microglia cells as previously
proposed [18, 21, 35]. In a subsequent study, Bard and
colleagues [35] concluded that passively transferred anti-Aβ
antibodies do cross the BBB and induce clearance of
amyloid plaques via Fc receptor (FcR)-mediated
phagocytosis by activated microglia. Ex vivo experiments
demonstrated that exogenous microglia can be induced to
clear amyloid plaques from brain tissue when co-incubated
with certain anti-Aβ antibodies, but not Fab fragments of
these antibodies. This finding suggests that the Fc fragment

Immunotherapy for Alzheimer’s Disease

of antibodies is instrumental in microglia-mediated Aβ
clearance [21]. Furthermore, in vitro and ex vivo studies from
the same group confirmed these results with IgG2a
antibodies that bind to FcR with high affinity. Interestingly,
complement activation was not required for plaque clearance
[35]. Using multiphoton microscopy to analyze the brains of
APP/Tg mice injected with high concentrations of anti-Aβ
antibodies, Bacskai et al. demonstrated that microglial
activation correlates with Aβ plaque clearance [36]. Use of
Fab fragments of the same molecules instead of whole antiAβ antibodies demonstrated that non-Fc-mediated
mechanisms are also involved in Aβ plaque clearance by
anti-Aβ antibodies [37]. It is also possible, however, that
direct binding of antibodies to Aβ-plaques or soluble Aβ
species induce disaggregation of Aβ plaques or block
cytotoxicity of this peptide, as has been demonstrated in
several in vitro studies [8, 38-42].
CLEARANCE OF Aβ BY ANTIBODY-MEDIATED
DISAGGREGATION AND/OR INHIBITION OF
ASSEMBLY OF EXTRACELLULAR Aβ DEPOSITS
Another mechanism that may account for at least a
portion of the clearance of extracellular Aβ deposits by antiAβ antibodies that cross the BBB and enter the brain, is
based on the anti-Aβ antibodies inhibiting aggregation
and/or inducing disaggregation of neurotoxic forms of Aβ.
The first report of anti-Aβ antibodies inhibiting assembly or
promoting disassembly of preformed fibrillar Aβ, were in
vitro studies using a monoclonal antibody raised against the
1-28 region of Aβ [38, 39]. This in vitro result is quite
surprising because amyloid deposits are highly insoluble and
protease resistant. Subsequently, the N-terminal EFRH
sequence was proposed as the dominant epitope in blocking
assembly of Aβ [40], and high affinity antibodies appear to
be required for significant activity [41]. This suggests that at
least in vitro, there is a critical concentration of Aβ
monomers/dimers/oligomers in solution to maintain the
assembly state of the fibrillar form of the peptide. Moreover,
it has been shown that anti-Aβ4−10 polyclonal antibodies not
only inhibit aggregation of Aβ1-42 , but also block
cytotoxicity of this peptide [42]. Thus, the binding of
antibodies to these soluble or semi-soluble forms of Aβ may
reduce the free concentration of these species, which then
causes the fibrils to disassemble until the critical
concentration is reestablished. Whether the same assembly
parameters exist in vivo for Aβ remains to be determined,
because in vivo conditions may be quite different, due to the
chemical cross-linking and glycation of fibrillar Aβ deposits
as they age, and the co-deposition of plaque-associated
pathological chaperones in AD [43]. Alternatively, it is
possible that in vivo binding of antibodies to the EFRH
epitope of fibrillar Aβ may induce a conformational change
in the monomer that reduces the affinity of the monomer for
the fibril, resulting in the sequential removal of monomers
by antibodies. Regardless of the actual mechanism involved,
these in vitro and in vivo data indicate that if anti-Aβ
antibodies cross the BBB, they could directly interact with
N-terminal region of Aβ in the brain and reduce AD
pathology by clearing Aβ deposits. Analysis of additional
cases from the first clinical trial, particularly those that did
not suffer an adverse inflammatory event, may ultimately

Current Immunology Reviews, 2005, Vol. 1, No. 2

141

reveal whether or not anti-Aβ antibodies generated in AD
patients crossed the BBB and participated in the clearance of
established plaques.
CLEARANCE OF Aβ FROM THE BRAIN BY ANTIAβ
ANTIBODIES
RESTRICTED
TO
THE
PERIPHERY:
THE
PERIPHERAL
SINK
HYPOTHESIS
Another mechanism that may explain the results of preclinical and clinical Aβ-immunotherapy trials comes from
the passive immunization studies of DeMattos et al.
[22,44]. They demonstrated that passive ad