CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL. 36 NO. 2

EEG Mapping and Low-ResoIut ion Brain EIectromagnetic
Tomography (LORETA) in Diagnosis and Therapy of
Psychiatric Disorders: Evidence for a Key-Lock Principle
Bernd Saletu, Peter Anderer, Gerda M. Saletu-Zyhlarz and Roberto D. Pascual-Marqui

Key Words
EEG Mapping
EEG Tomography
Key-Lock Principle
Low-Resolution Brain Electromagnetic Tomography
(LOR ETA)
Mental Disorders
Psychotropic Drugs

and beta activity. On the other hand, representative drugs
of the main psychopharmacological classes, such as neuroleptics, antidepressants, tranquilizers, hypnotics, psychostimulants, nootropics or cognition-enhancing drugs,
induce significant changes in the quantitatively analyzed
EEG compared with placebo, which, graphically displayed,
result in different pharmaco-EEG profiles based on singlelead analysis (mostly 02-Cz), and pharmaco-EEG maps
(based on multi-lead analysis). Thus, it seems of interest to
investigate the relationship between alterations induced by
psychiatric disorders and psychopharmaceutical agents
intended for their treatment.

ABSTRACT
Different psychiatric disorders, such as schizophrenia
with predominantly positive and negative symptomatdogy,
major depression, generalized anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, obsessive-compulsive disorder, multi-infarct dementia,
senile dementia of the Alzheimer type and alcohol dependence, show EEG maps that differ statistically both from
each other and from normal controls. Representative drugs
of the main psychopharmacological classes, such as sedative and non-sedative neuroleptics and antidepressants,
tranquilizers, hypnotics, psychostimulants and cognitionenhancing drugs, induce significant and typical changes to
normal human brain function, which in many variables are
opposite to the above-mentioned differences between psychiatric patients and normal controls. Thus, by considering
these differences between psychotropic drugs and placebo
in normal subjects, as well as between mental disorder
patients and normal controls, it may be possible to choose
the optimum drug for a specific patient according to a keylock principle, since the drug should normalize the deviant
brain function. This is supported by 3-dimensional low-resolution brain electromagnetic tomography (LORETA), which
identifies regions within the brain that are affected by psychiatric disorders and psychopharmacological substances.

EEG MAPPING OF DIFFERENT
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Utilizing standardized recording and analyzing procedures,” we found that drug-free schizophrenics demonstrated a decrease in alpha activity, an increase in beta activity
and an acceleration of the beta centroid compared with controls, which suggests a state of hyperarousal in schizophrenia. While schizophrenic patients with predominantly negative syniptomatology showed bitemporal and frontal augmentation of deltdtheta, patients with positive symptomatology exhibited an attenuation in these measures (Figure 1).
The increase in slow activity suggests an organic factor in
the pathogenesis of the negative syndrome.
Major depression in the menopause was characterized
by a decrease in absolute power in all frequency bands, a
tendency towards an augmentation of relative deltdtheta
and beta and a decrease in alpha activity as well as by a
slowing of the deltdtheta centroid and an acceleration of the
alpha and beta centroid, reflecting a decrease in vigilance.
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) patients with
nonorganic insomnia showed increased total, absolute
deltdtheta and alpha as well as relative alpha power and
decreased relative beta power, neurophysiologically

INTRODUCTION
As has been demonstrated by various investigators,
clinically well-defined diagnostic subgroups of mental disorders show electrophysiological patterns that differ statistically both from each other and from normal controls.’ ’ In
our studies, applying standardized recording and analyzing
procedures,8 we indeed described distinct differences
between psychiatric populations and normal controls in
standardized EEG descriptors, such as absolute and relative power as well as the centroid of the deltdtheta, alpha

From the Department of Psychiatry,Medical University of Vienna, Austria
(6. Saletu, P. Anderer. G. Saletu-Zyhlarr), and The Key Institute for BrainMind Research, University Hospital of Psychiatry, Zurich, Switzerland (R D
Pascual-Marqui).
Address requests for reprints to Bernd Saletu, MD, Professor of
Psychiatry, Department of Psychlatry, Medical Universily of Vienna.
Wahringer Gurtel 18-20, A-1090 Vienna, Austria
Email: bernd.saletu@rneduniwien.ac.at

108
Downloaded from eeg.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 4, 2015

CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL 36 NO. 2

Figure 1.
Maps on EEG differences between 9 mental disorder patients and normal controls. Statisticalprobability maps (SPM) depicting intergroup
differences in total, absolute and relative power as well as the centroids of the delta, theta, alpha and beta frequency bands (from top to
bottom) are shown (birds eye view, nose at the top, left ear left, right ear right, whiie dots indicate electrode positions). Orange, red and
purple colors represent significant (p < 0.10,0.05 and 0.01, respecbvely) increases; dark green, light blue and dark Mue indicate significant (p < 0.10,0.05 and 0.01, respectively) decreases, as compared with normal controls. In columns from left to right, schizophrenics
with a predominantly positive symptomatology (N: 18), for instance, exhibit an attenuated absolute delta and theta power, while schizophrenics
a predominantly negative symptomatology (N: 30)show an increase. Major depression (N: So),generalized anxiety disorder
(N: 41), agoraphobia (N: 21), obsessivecompulsivedisorder (N: 12), multi-infarctdementia (N: 24), senile dementia of the Alzheimer type
(N: 24) and alcoholdependent patients currently abstinent (N: 29)show different EEG maps, as compared with normal controls.

Downloaded from eeg.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 4, 2015

CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL. 36 NO. 2

Figure 2.
Demented patient
On the electrophysiological key-lock
(GM, 56a, female)
principle in diagnosis and treatment of
vs. healthy controls
mental disorders. Maps on differences
in total power, absolute delwheta,
alpha and beta power (rows 1 and 2)
and the total centroid, as well as, relaPyritinol600mg
tive deltahheta, alpha and beta power
vs. placebo in
normals
(rows 3 and 4) between a 56-year-old
female patient with dementia of the
Alzheimer type, atypical or mixed form
(ICD-10: F00.2), and an age-matched
Dementedpatient
normal control group, expressed in
(GM, 56a, female)
terms of z-values (differences to the
vs. healthy controls
norm in number of standard deviations
from the norm), are shown in the first
and third rows. Differences between
600 mg pyritinol and placebo in normal
Pyritinol 600 mg
volunteers are depicted in the second
vs. placebo in
normaIs
and fourth rows. Yellow and light green
colors represent increases or decreases
wtthin 1 standard deviation from the
norm, ocher and dark green show differences between 1 and 2 standard deviations, bright red colors represent significant increases of 2
or more standard deviations, and blue colors show decreases of 2 or more standard deviations from the norm. Note that the EEG
changes in normals after the nootropic drug are opposite to the alterations induced by the disease (key-lock principle).

reflecting hypervigilance. This pattern is similar to another
anxiety disorder, agoraphobia, with and without panic disorder, which, however, in contrast to GAD, also exhibits
augmented beta activity and accelerated deltdtheta and
alpha centroids. Obsessive-compulsive disorder showed a
different pattern of activity, characterized by an attenuation
of total and absolute deltdtheta and beta power, a
decrease in relative deltdtheta and an increase in relative
alpha activity, as well as a slowing of the deltdtheta centroid. Thus, different anxiety disorders show different electrophysiological patterns.

Alcohol-dependent patients predominantly showed an
increase in absolute and relative beta power and a
decrease in alpha and deltdtheta power, with an additional deltdtheta slowing and acceleration of the beta centroid.
For an individual psychiatric patient one may obtain
routine EEG maps of 36 EEG variables and visualize the
differences between the measures of the patient and those
of a normal control group by plotting them in terms of the
number of standard deviations from the norm (Z-scores).
An increase in deltdtheta power, a decrease in alpha and
beta power and a slowing of the total centroid, for instance,
suggest dementia (Figure 2). The ideal drug for such a
patient would be the one inducing EEG changes opposite
to those caused by the disease and has to be chosen from
one of the psychotropic drug classes described below.
EEG MAPPING OF DIFFERENT
PSYCHOTROPIC DRUG CUSSES
As was already attempted by Hans Berger in the early
days of the EEG, psychopharmacologistshave been eager
to employ the EEG for classification purposes as well as for
the determination of the bioavailability of drugs at the target organ - the human brain. Our own pharmaco-EEG
studies in normal subjects11demonstrated that a sedative
neuroleptic like 50 mg chlorpromazine attenuates total
power, increases deltajtheta and decreases alpha and
beta power, with a slowing of all centroids and also of the
total centroid (Figure 3). In contrast, the non-sedative neuroleptic 3 mg haloperidol does not change total power,

Demented patients, of both the vascular (multi-infarct
dementia = MID) and the degenerative (senile
dementidAlzheimer’s type = SDAT) subtypes, exhibited a
massive augmentation of absolute deltdtheta power, an
increase in relative deltdtheta, a decrease in alpha and
beta power, as well as an acceleration of the deltdtheta
and a slowing of the alpha and beta centroids. Thus, both
subtypes of dementia show a vigilance decrement with differences between them lying in the asymmetry indices and
in differences between minimum and maximum power.
Under vigilance one understands (since Head) the availability and grade of organization of man’s adaptive behavior, which is in turn dependent on the dynamic state of the
neuronal network. The latter can be measured objectively
and quantitatively by computerized EEG analysis. Utilizing
neuronal network statistics on absolute deltdtheta power
findings, we correctly classified 90% of demented patients.
110

Downloaded from eeg.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 4, 2015

CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL. 36 NO. 2

Figure 3.
Maps on differences between 9 representativedrugs of the major psychopharmacological classes and placebo after acute oral drug
administration (time of phannacodynamic peak effect, mostly 2nd hour post-drug). For technical descriptionsof the maps and the color
key, see Figure 1. In columns from left to right, different drug-inducedchanges are topographically displayedafter single-dose administration of 50 mg chlorpromazine (N:15), 3 mg haloperidol (N: 20), 75 mg imipramine (N: 15). 20 mg citalopram (N: 20), 30 mg clobazam
(N: 15), 2 mg brazepam (N: 15), 20 mg amphetamine (N:15), 20 mg metamphetamine (N: 20) and 600 mg pyritinol (N: 12). While, for
instance, 50 mg chlorpromazine increases absolute delta and theta power and decreases alpha power (CNS sedation), 600 mg pyritinol
increases absolute alpha-1 and beta power (vigilance improvement).

111
Downloaded from eeg.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 4, 2015

CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL. 36 NO. 2

HaloDeridol 3ma vs. placebo in normals

I

Pascual-Marqui et al 1999

I

I

Figure 4.
LORETA images on differences in regional brain electrical activity of 9 schizophrenics as compared with 36 controls are shown in the left
part of the figure; the right part depicts EEG differences between acute 3 mg haloperidol and placebo in 20 healthy subjects. Images show
voxel-by-voxel1-statistics using LORETAfor the delta, theta, alpha-1 and alpha-2frequency bands. Hyperactivity (excess) in patients is
indicated by red, hypoactivity (deficit) by blue. The frequency band is identified in the right upper corner of each set of three orthogonal
brain views in Talairach space, sliced through the region of the extreme 1-value. Structural anatomy is shown in gray scale (white to black).
Left: axial slices, seen from above, nose up; center; sagittal slices, seen from the left; right: coronal slices, seen from the rear. Talairach
coordinates: X from left (L) to right (A); Y from posterior (P)to anterior (A); Z from inferior to superior. The locations of the extreme 1-values
are given as (X, Y, Z)coordinates in Talairach space, and are graphically indicated by black triangles on the coordinate axes.
As compared with placebo, haloperidol induces changes opposite to the differences between untreated schizophrenics and controls,
thereby supportingthe hypothesis of a key-lock principle in diagnosis and pharmacotherapyof mental disorders.

power. The deltaltheta centroid is slowed, as is partly the
beta centroid, while the total centroid is accelerated. Nighttime tranquilizers attenuate total power, decrease absolute
and relative alpha power, increase absolute and relative
beta power as well as relative deltdtheta power, slow the
centroid of deltahheta activity and accelerate that of alpha
activity, as well as of total activity.
Psychostimulants, such as 20 mg amphetamine, attenuate total power, decrease absolute deltahheta, alpha and
beta power, decrease relative deltdtheta and increase relative alpha power. The total centroid is accelerated, while
after 20 mg amphetamine or 20 mg methylphenidate, differential changes are observed in the centroid of the
deltdtheta and beta band.
Nootropics, such as 600 mg pyritinol, augment total
power, as well as absolute alpha and beta power, attenuate

increases deltdtheta (predominantly theta), slightly
decreases alpha and increases beta activity, while the centroids remain unchanged.
Sedative antidepressants of the imipramine-amitriptyline
type attenuate total power, decrease absolute deltaltheta
and specifically alpha power, increase relative deltaltheta
and decrease relative alpha and to some extent also relative
beta power and slow the total centroid. This is partly in contrast to non-sedative antidepressants, since 20 mg citalopram, for instance, also attenuates total power, absolute
deltaltheta and alpha power, but increases absolute and relative beta power, slows the deltahheta centroid and accelerates the alpha and beta,as well as the total centroid.
Daytime tranquilizers, such as 30 mg clobazam,
decrease total power, absolute and relative deltdtheta and
alpha power and increase absolute and relative beta
112

Downloaded from eeg.sagepub.com at UCSF LIBRARY & CKM on March 4, 2015

CLINICAL EEG and NEUROSCIENCE

02005 VOL. 36 NO. 2

GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER (GAD) PATIENTS
vs. NORMAL CONTROLS (N = 2 x 44)
MAX, W.18(psO01)atX=-lOY=45Z=5O(BA8, SlperiorFrontalGyrus,
Frontal Labe); I ~ S I J P R AM~ hSp'H
-O.Q
m~
R 387 W4.m)
MAX2: t=2.90 (p4.01) at X=-24 Y=102 Z=i (BA 18, Cuneus, Occipital Lobe),
nSUPRAMRE6HQI.Rwith ~ 4 . 0 5 Q= 314 b 4 . W )

4 WEEKS SOMNIUM
(1 mg LORAZEPAM + 25 rng DIPHENHYDRAMINE)

AT BEDTIME VS. PRE-DRUG PLACEBO (N=22)
Slices according to GAD vs. Controls

MIN: t=-5.70 (pQ.01) at X=-3 Y= -462=22 (BA 30,Posterior Cingulurn,
Parietal Lobe, Linbc Lobe); ~ S I J ~ ~ T H ~ ~ H Q
withU )peO.05 = 2103 (pQ.05)

VIGILANCECONTROLLED EEG

I

1

1 power between generalized anxiety
disorder patientsand normal controls
(n=2x44) (upper part of the figure) as
well as between 4 weeks of treatment
with Somnium (1 mg lorazepam t 25 mg
diphenhydramine) and placebo (n=22)
(lower part of the figure). Images are
based on voxel-by-voxel1-valuesof differences between patients and controls
or drug and placebo. Red colors indicate