1 |

Introduction

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that accounts for 60-80% of dementia cases, constituting a major health challenge. AD is characterized by accumulation of extracellular amyloid-beta (Aß) plaques and hyperphosphorylated tau (pTau) neurofibrillary tangles, which are associated with inflammation, neuronal death, and brain atrophy. Since neuronal loss becomes rapid and largely irreversible once substantial AD pathology has accumulated, current therapeutic strategies emphasize identifying biomarkers and drug targets at the earliest stages of disease, before widespread neurodegeneration occurs. The recent approval of the first disease-modifying treatments that act on underlying pathologyfurther underscores the critical importance of early detection and intervention in AD, as these treatments are only approved for individuals in early AD stages.

There are several documented epidemiological factors that impact risk for developing AD. Americans of African ancestry (AA) are more likely to develop AD than Americans of European ancestry (EA), even when controlling for environmental factors. Females are at overall higher risk of developing AD, but the effect of sex on risk is modified by both age and ancestry. However, the strongest genetic risk factor for AD is allelic variation at the Apolipoprotein E (locus, withE4 increasing risk andE2 reducing risk.E4 is associated with higher levels of amyloid beta deposition and pTau pathology, whileE2 delays pathology. Importantly, ancestry also interacts with the effects ofallelic risk. For instance, E2 and E4 alleles are more common in AA compared to EA populations, but the protective and risk effects are stronger in EA. AdditionallyE4 is a major risk factor for treatment adverse effects known as amyloid-related imaging abnormalities (ARIA). Understanding the impacts ofgenotype, sex and ancestry on biological processes in the human brain prior to disease onset could be key to developing preventive AD treatments.

AD pathology progressively appears in brain regions in a specific order, with the entorhinal cortex (ERC) being one of the first cortical regions impacted in AD. Part of the periallocortex, the ERC serves as the interface between the hippocampus and neocortex, playing a critical role in integrating positional and temporal information for episodic memory formation. The anatomical and cytoarchitectural organization of the human ERC is important to understanding the early stages of AD. Molecular characterization of AD pathology in ERC has identified pTau tangles in Layer 2 ERC neurons and revealed AD-associated changes in white matter.

AD is also associated with dysfunction of several specific cell types, including various glial populations. Astrocytes are linked to increased lipid metabolism and brain cholesterol synthesis. Oligodendrocytes are linked to disease via observations of decreased myelination in AD patients and in iPSC models of APOE4 Oligos. Microglia mount an inflammatory response in AD characterized by increased expression of triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (), which has been hypothesized to trigger the phagocytosis of amyloid beta plaques with supporting evidence from aknockout mice study. Single-nucleus RNA-seq (snRNA-seq) studies in postmortem human prefrontal and entorhinal cortex demonstrate that many AD-related gene expression changes are cell type-specific, with oligodendrocytes showing many transcriptional differences. Studies have also identified changes in cell states in AD, specifically microglia activation and disease-associated astrocytes and oligodendrocytes.

Given that specific cell types and cortical layers have been implicated in AD, it is critical to understand the laminar organization of ERC cell type populations in the context of AD risk factors. To investigate spatially-localized cell type vulnerability related to AD risk, we generated paired snRNA-seq and spatially-resolved transcriptomics (SRT) data in postmortem human ERC tissue from middle aged brain donors with no clinical signs of AD. Donors were stratified acrossgenotype (E2+ versus E4+ carriers), ancestry (AA versus EA), and sex. We have targeted the cellular and molecular landscape of risk to identify factors that might be targeted before the emergence of clinical illness. We characterized human ERC spatial domains and cell types, focusing on subpopulations of glial cell types. We identified differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between E2+ and E4+ carriers, with most identified in a specific oligodendrocyte subcluster showing a transcriptional signature consistent with a more immature, non-myelinating state. We also found ancestry-specific DEGs between E2+ and E4+ carriers, which mostly did not overlap, hinting at ancestry-specific mechanisms ofrisk contribution to AD.

2 |

Results

2.1 |

Evaluatingrisk in a diverse population

This study was designed to evaluate gene expression changes across cell types and spatial domains mediated by biological risk factors for AD, including allelic variation at thelocus, ancestry and sex. We generated paired spatially-resolved transcriptomics (SRT) and snRNA-seq data in postmortem human entorhinal cortex (ERC) tissue from adult brain donors with no clinical signs of AD (,). The final analyzed cohort included 30 donors with diverse risk of AD, including reduced risk in E2+carriers (n=14) and increased risk in E4+carriers (n=16,,).allele carrier groups contained both hetero- and homozygotegenotypes across 21 male and 9 female donors (-). Age at time of death for the cohort ranged from 30 to 68 years old (). Ancestry modifies the effect ofgenotype, and accordingly, our cohort included 14 African ancestry (AA) and 16 European ancestry (EA) donors acrossE2+ and E4+ genotypes(,). Ancestry was reported by legal next-of-kin and confirmed by death records, and DNA genotyping data was used to match predicted ancestry (,:). All donors had no clinical AD diagnosis and evidence of only minimal to no AD-associated pathology (-).

2.2 |

Human ERC contains both laminar and non-laminar spatial domains

To characterize the topography of gene expression in the ERC, we generated SRT data using the Visium spatial gene expression platform (10x Genomics) on a single tissue section from each donor (). Following quality control, we obtained a median of 3,964 high-quality spots per sample and a total of 122,742 spots across donors. While ERC samples showed some variation in orientation, patterns of transcriptional activity and expression of layer-associated marker genes confirmed that each tissue section included white matter (WM) and layered gray matter (GM,,-). Following batch correction using(,), we performed spatially aware clustering withand identified transcriptionally distinct spatial domains (SpDs), with=9 being the optimal number of SpDs (,,). We observed the expected number of reads, detected genes and mitochondrial rate across SpDs indicating that clustering was not driven by technical factors, but rather accurately represented the organization of gene expression across the ERC architecture ().

To annotate SpDs, we leveraged anatomical landmarks and data driven marker genes (,). We characterized the 9 SpDs using our previously developed spatial registration frameworkby integrating our ERC SRT data with SRT data from the human dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), and to an ERC snRNA-seq. We also evaluated expression of established human and mouse cortical layer marker genes, including ERC-specific gene sets in rodents. Spatial domains were named with the following syntax:~SpDwherewas the layer annotation associated to domainat clustering resolution. Vasc~SpDwas the outermost layer and had high expression of blood-associated genes (,,,), suggesting that this SpD represented a vasculature meninges layer. Vasc~SpDalso showed high correlation with the vascular SpD in human DLPFC, and vascular cell types from Franjic et al. (,). The next most superficial SpD, L1~SpD, had high expression of, a known marker of astrocytes enriched in L1 in ERC and other cortical regions (,,). L1~SpDalso showed the highest expression of, consistent with the well-recognized high expression ofin astrocytes(,). Middle SpDs, including L2.3~SpD, LD~SpD, and Inhib~SpD, showed less discrete laminar organization. While L2.3~SpDmapped to L2/3 in DLPFC (), a key structural difference between ERC and DLPFC is a low cell density L4 or “laminar desicans” (LD) in ERC. LD~SpDwas the most abundant SpD (), and given its position between the GM layers, enrichment in low nuclei spots (), and weak association with ERC cell types (), we annotated this SpD as the laminar desicans. Consistent with the notion that lamination of the ERC is less well-defined than that of neocortical regions, ERC SpDs representing L2-4 did not specifically register with histological layers of DLPFC (). In contrast to superficial ERC layers, deeper layers annotated as L5~SpDand L6~SpDwere more continuously laminar. L5~SpDshowed high expression of, a classic L5 marker in human cortex(,), as well asa L5a marker in rodent ERC. We did not see strong evidence for L5 sublayers at this clustering resolution (). L6~SpDwas located between L5~SpDand WM, and registered with DLPFC L6 (). Registration to ERC Layer annotated neurons from Franjic et al. supported L2, L5, and L6 identities (). Finally, we identified an inhibitory neuron SpD (Inhib~SpD) with high expression ofand, and registration to ERC inhibitory neurons, interspersed throughout the middle GM layers (,).

Beyond GM domains, we identified two WM domains. We annotated a more superficial WM U-fiber layer (WM.uf~SpD) aligned with known fiber tracts in ERCand defined by low transcriptional activity (). We also defined a deeper WM layer (WM~SpD) with relatively higher expression of canonical WM marker genes, such as(). WM.uf~SpDin ERC spatially registered to the two WM SpDs in the DLPFC, while WM~SpDin ERC matched the superficial DLPFC WM domain, suggesting unique WM organization in the ERC (). Compared to mouse ERC, human ERC contained more SpDs and substantially different gene expression in L3 and L5 (). Having characterized SpDs in ERC, we next examined differences between SpD frequency acrosscarrier groups to rule out changes in laminar organization related to AD risk. While all SpDs were represented in all donors, we observed different SpD frequencies across tissue sections, likely due to dissection variation (). However, differential proportion analysis with, which utilizes centered log ratios (CLR, a transformation of proportion values) to test for composition differences, did not show significant differences in SpD composition bycarrier status (-,,). These data represent the first molecular atlas of the human ERC and define transcriptionally discrete SpDs for downstream differential expression analyses.

2.3 |

Identification of fine resolution ERC single cell clusters and integration with SRT data

To define molecular profiles for ERC cell type populations, we generated snRNA-seq data for each donor (Chromium, 10x Genomics,,). After quality control and batch correction, we performed two rounds of clustering to 1) identify clusters driven by low quality and 2) identify cell type clusters resulting in the characterization of 122,004 high quality nuclei (-). Based on literature-derived and data-driven marker gene expression, cells were categorized into 38 fine subclusters across 8 broad cell types: astrocytes (subclusters: Astro.1-5), macrophages (Macro), microglia (Micro.1-5), oligodendrocytes (Oligo.1-5), oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC.1-5), vascular cells (pericytes (Vasc.PC), endothelial (Vasc.Endo), and vascular leptomeningeal cells (Vasc.VLMC)), plus excitatory (Excit) and inhibitory (Inhib) neurons with 8 and 7 sub-clusters, respectively (-,,,). Inhibitory neuron subclusters were annotated based on expression of specific inhibitory marker genes (,,,,)and cluster registrationagainst previously published DLPFC and ERC datasets(). We identified data-drivenmarker genes for the fine subclusters to generate molecular profiles for these ERC cell type subclusters (,).

Spatial registrationbetween ERC snRNA-seq fine subclusters and ERC SRT SpDs revealed cellular organization within ERC cytoarchitecture (). This allowed for refined annotation of excitatory neuron subclusters based on their laminar organization, including two populations (Excit.L2_5.1 and Excit.L2_5.2) that mapped to both L2.3~SpDand L5~SpD(). Compared to ERC SpDs, all snRNA-seq inhibitory neuron subclusters correlated strongly with Inhib~SpDas expected. Vascular snRNA-seq subclusters mapped to the vascular SpD (Vasc~SpD), astrocyte fine subclusters mapped to L1~SpD, and all snRNA-seq oligodendrocyte subpopulations mapped to WM~SpD(). Macrophage and microglia subclusters had weak matches to Vasc~SpD, and likewise for OPC subclusters to L1~SpD(). Integration of SRT and snRNA-seq data through spot deconvolution withfurther confirmed SRT and cell type annotations, such as increased Astro proportions in L1~SpD(,).

Next, we examinedand other known AD risk genes across all subclusters to evaluate the cellular landscape of AD risk. As expected,expression was highest in astrocytes, specifically Astro.1 (,), although other cell types, including microglia, macrophage, and pericytes expressedat lower levels. While AD-associated cell states have been identified in several glia cell types, none of our Astro, Micro, and Oligo subclusters showed high expression of genes linked to disease-associated cell type states such as,, and(-). As donors in our cohort did not have AD-related pathology, this provided evidence that these previously reported disease-associated cell type states are not intrinsic to genetic risk for AD (-).

To investigate whethercarrier status, sex, and age influenced snRNA-seq cell type proportions, we examined subcluster composition across these demographic groups. While Astro and Oligo were the most abundant ERC cell types (), all 38 subclusters were detected in at least 19 donors, and 26 (68%) were detected in all donors. Subcluster composition varied across individual donors (), but no clusters were specific to onecarrier group (). Next, we performed differential proportion analysis with, overcarrier status, sex, and age (,,,:).E4+ carriers showed a decrease in frequency in Oligo.1 and Oligo.2 compared to E2+ carriers (). In female donors, Oligo.5 and Oligo.3 subclusters had significantly increased frequency compared to males (). Age-associated proportion differences were identified in Oligo.5, with no significant interaction withcarrier groups (). Overall, Oligo frequency was the most variable overcarrier status, sex, and age, suggesting changes in ERC cell composition could be a factor in AD risk with implications for early changes in AD.

2.4 |

carrier status influences gene expression in spatially-defined white matter and vascular domains

To understand the impact ofcarrier status on spatial gene expression in the ERC, we performed differential gene expression analyses of SRT data followed by Gene Ontology (GO) overrepresentation analysis in E4+ versus E2+ carriers adjusting for ancestry and sex (,,). The highest number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs, FDR < 0.05, 22 upregulated and 8 downregulated) was localized to Vasc~SpD, which contained Astro, Oligo, and Vasc cells based on spot deconvolution analyses (). These DEGs included downregulation ofand, genes implicated in oligodendrocyte differentiation (,). In line with findings that WM may be most susceptible to early AD-related pathology,the U-fiber WM SpD (WM.uf~SpD) had the second most DEGs (-). Specific to WM.uf~SpD, we observed upregulation of theparaloguewhich has known functions in modulating tau pathology (). Notably,is an AD risk gene encoding the microtubule-associated protein tau. Myelination and axon ensheathment GO terms were common in downregulated genes across WM.uf~SpD, Vasc~SpD, and L6~SpD(,-,).

While most DEGs were unique to one SpD, we identified several shared DEGs across multiple SpDs, several of which were linked to AD (). For example,, a gene involved in memory and learning, was significantly upregulated in both Vasc~SpDand L5~SpD()., a gene linked to dipeptidase activity and oligodendrocyte differentiation (), was downregulated in E4+ in WM.uf~SpDand Vasc~SpD, (-). KLK6 is a serine protease expressed primarily by oligodendrocytes and is downregulated in the temporal cortex and hippocampus of AD patients. Notably, KLK6 has been proposed as a biomarker for AD given that AD patients have higher KLK6 levels in cerebrospinal fluid. Other genes related to dipeptidase activity (,,) were also downregulated in Vasc~SpD(,). Taken together, we observed distinct gene expression changes between E2+ and E4+ carriers across SpDs, implicating different biological processes across ERC layers.

To directly investigate how ancestry and sex modifyrisk, we identified ancestry-specific and sex-specific DEGs across E2+ and E4+ carriers. For ancestry-specific analyses, we identified 15 DEGs in WM.uf~SpDfor AA, while EA donors only had 2 downregulated DEGs (1 in each WM SpD,). In WM~SpD,downregulation was observed in EA, but not AA donors (+,,:).encodes a protein marker for peroxisomes, organelles involved in lipid homeostasis. Downregulation ofis consistent with peroxisome density decreases in the ERC as AD pathology increases. Ancestry-specific E4+ downregulation ofsuggests reduction of peroxisomes may be more pronounced in E4+ EA individuals. We next examined risk difference between males and females, and in total identified 91 male DEGs in WM.uf~SpD, and 1 female DEG,, in WM~SpD(++). The larger number of DEGs in males was likely influenced by the uneven representation of sexes across the cohort (21/30 male; 70%). Similar to the overall DEG results (), genes downregulated in male WM~SpD, such as,, andwere associated with myelination. In summary, we found thatcarrier status has the largest impact on gene expression in WM and vasculature SpDs with differences across ancestry and sex.

2.5 |

E4+ is associated with altered transcription in oligodendrocytes

AD causes diverse changes across cell types. Given the limited cell type resolution of SRT data, we next leveraged our paired snRNA-seq data to perform differential expression followed by GO overrepresentation analysis betweencarrier groups. We compared E2+ vs. E4+ carriers at both broad cell type and fine subcluster resolution. At broad resolution, Oligo had the most DEGs, followed by Astro, Excit and Inhib neurons (-,,). We observed very few DEGs in other broad cell types, including microglia. DEGs were often cell type-specific, although some genes, such aswere upregulated in multiple cell types (i.e. Astro, Oligo, and Excit ()) in E4+ compared to E2+ carriers. Genes upregulated in Astro in E4+ carriers, such asandwere associated with synaptic membrane GO terms (,). In Oligo, upregulated genes in E4+ carriers, such aswere associated with extracellular matrix and external encapsulating structure (,). We also observed upregulation of calcium channel genes in E4+ Oligo (). Likewise,had the largest fold change between E4+ and E2+ Oligos ().

Similar to SRT data, we also examined ancestry- and sex-specific DEGs by cell type acrossE2+ and E4+ carriers. Ancestry-specific analysis identified 98 DEGs in Astro in AA donors (,), withupregulated in E4+ carriers with a large difference between EA and AA donors (,).was uniquely downregulated in Vasc of EA donors compared to AA donors (). Sex-specific DEGs were detected mostly in males (948 DEGs), with the majority observed in Oligo and Excit. Only 2 DEGs were detected in females (++,:), likely due to reduced sample size. In summary, DE analysis at the broad cell type level was consistent with DE analysis in SRT data, with most DEGs identified in glia-enriched SpDs (WM.uf~SpDand Vasc~SpD) and Oligos.

2.6 |

Fine resolution snRNA-seq DEGs concentrated in an oligodendrocyte subcluster

Given that broad cell types contain a diversity of highly heterogeneous subtypes, we next investigated differential gene expression in our fine resolution snRNA-seq subclusters betweenE2+ and E4+ carriers. The majority of DEGs were found in oligodendrocyte subcluster Oligo.3 (,,, 679 upregulated and 343 downregulated genes, FDR<0.05). Downregulated genes in Oligo.3 were implicated in myelination and oligodendrocyte differentiation, such as,,,,, and(,,). The gene encoding tau,, is expressed in oligodendrocytes and has a significant developmental role in oligodendrocyte maturation and myelin synthesis.was downregulated in Oligo.3 (), suggesting a link between AD risk and impaired oligodendrocyte differentiation. Upregulated Oligo.3 DEGs included,,, and, which are all involved in response to calcium ion (,,).,, andare also associated with inflammation, and may suggest an interferon response. Specifically,promotes a pro-inflammatory feed forward loop that causes secondary inflammation in AD pathogenesis. This suggests that in E4+ carriers, Oligo.3 may exist in an immune-reactive state. Oligo.3 cells also had significant upregulation of, a gene implicated in Parkinson’s disease (PD), which is of interest given commonalities between PD and AD. OPCs showed the highestexpression (viewable through our-powered app), which is consistent with reports showingknockdown affects OPC to oligodendrocyte maturation.

Next, we examined DEGs in other subclusters, with both Astro.3 downregulated and Micro.4 upregulated in E4+ DEGs presenting common GO overrepresented terms with Oligo.3 DEGs down and upregulated in E4+, respectively (). Astrocyte subcluster Astro.3 shared many downregulated DEGs with Oligo.3 (,), and also showed GO overrepresentation hits for myelination terms (+,). Notably,was the most significant downregulated gene in Astro.3 (). Generally, oligodendrocytes express very low levels of, therefore, theeffect in the Oligo.3 subcluster may be due to effects in cell type in whichis more highly expressed, such as astrocytes (). Communication between two or more cell types could lead to coordinated responses in gene expression, which could lead to common sets of DEGs. For instance, DEGs downregulated in Inhib in E4+ carriers includedand, which were also downregulated DEGs in Oligo.3 (+,).

To better characterize cellular interactions between Oligo.3 and other fine resolution ERC subclusters, we performed cell to cell communication (CCC) analysis withto identify recurrently used ligand-receptor (LR) pairs between a specific pair of subclusters (LR pairs observed in at least 20 donors). Unsurprisingly, communication among neuronal subclusters accounted for the most LR pairs in commonly observed interactions (,). Oligo.3 was either the source (n=115) or the target (n=111) for many recurrent LR interactions. Oligo.3 cells frequently communicated with several neuronal populations including Excit.L2, while also communicating with itself (). Common LR interaction genes and subcluster DEGs only overlapped in Oligo.3, involving 11 LR interactions communicating between Oligo.3 and OPC, Oligo, or neuronal subclusters (). DEG-involved L-R interactions were most spatially likely in gray matter domains (). Overall, altered gene expression in Oligo.3 may impact communication with linked cell types across ERC and within specific local microenvironments.

Identification of Oligo.3 as the primary subcluster implicated inE4+ risk prompted further investigation into the molecular identity of all 5 Oligo subclusters. Trajectory analysis revealed that Oligo.3 was most closely related to oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPC), suggesting Oligo.3 represented a more immature cell state compared with Oligo.1 and Oligo.2, the most mature Oligo subclusters (,,:). Analysis of marker genes within Oligo subclusters revealed that Oligo.1 and Oligo.2 highly express marker genes associated with mature myelinating Oligos, such asand(,). Top Oligo.3 enrichment marker genes, including, and, were implicated in neuronal communication. Many Oligo.3 marker genes were shared with OPC.5, supporting the close relationship between these subclusters identified by trajectory analysis (-). Following Oligo.3 in the trajectory analysis, Oligo.4 also showed marker genes involved in neuronal communication and had higher expression of myelination genes, although lower than that of Oligo.1 and Oligo.2 (,-). In comparison to other Oligo subclusters, Oligo.5 had higher expression of vascular-associated genes, such as, suggesting this population may represent perivascular oligodendrocytes(). Overall, trajectory and marker gene analyses support the identification of Oligo.3 as a non-myelinating oligodendrocyte population. Taken together with differential expression analyses, our data support a model in which large differences in transcription in Oligo.3 between E2+ and E4+ carriers could distinguish different cell states associated with AD risk. In E2+ carriers, Oligo.3 could be primed to differentiate into mature myelinating oligodendrocyte populations, while in E4+ carriers, Oligo.3 may be in an inflammatory state with reduced maturation into myelinating oligodendrocytes ().

Next, we evaluated the impact of ancestry and sex on Oligo.3 gene expression across E2+ and E4+ carriers. Both AA and EA donors showed ancestry-specific DEGs associated withcarrier status in Oligo.3 (), with some genes regulated in opposite directions (+). Oligo.3 upregulated genes in E4+ AA donors were associated with modulation of chemical synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter transport and secretion, and calcium ion transport. On the other hand, upregulated genes in E4+ EA donors were associated with muscle tissue development and extracellular matrix organization (). In particular, Oligo.3 showed upregulation in E4+ EA donors of,, andgenes implicated in the cellular component GO term caveola. Caveolae are bulb-shaped pits in the plasma membrane implicated in active intracellular signal transduction supporting cell survival signaling, and they have been previously proposed as a target for AD treatment. In terms of sex, Oligo.3 sex-specific DEGs were only detected in males (1,830 DEGs,). This may reflect oligodendrocyte transcriptional changes associated with AD observed only in males, but interpretation is limited by the lower number of female donors in our study. Some Oligo.3 DEGs in males, such asand(+), showed expression changes trending in an opposite direction from that of females, suggesting diverging sex-specific changes associated withcarrier status. In summary,E4+ carriers show differential gene expression in a specific non-myelinating oligodendrocyte subtype suggesting a differentiating state in E2+ donors compared to an immune reactive state in E4+ donors, with individual DEGs and their functions showing differences across donors with EA and AA ancestries.

2.7 |

Detection of oligodendrocyte risk signatures in AD

Previous snRNA-seq studies in AD donors report differential expression in oligodendrocytes. To determine whether AD risk signatures overlap with DEGs associated with AD diagnosis, we compared our data to two publicly available postmortem human snRNA-seq datasets including AD donors–one in the ERC (Grubman et al.)and one in the prefrontal cortex (Blanchard et al.). First, we performed gene set enrichment analysis between our fine resolution subcluster DEGs and cell type DEGs from Grubman et al., which included 6 AD donors and 6 controls, across a range ofgenotypes(). We observed significant overlap (FDR < 0.05) between downregulated Oligo DEGs in AD donors and downregulated Oligo.3 DEGs inE4+ carriers, including a shared decrease inand. However, there was no enrichment between upregulated Oligo DEGs in AD donors and upregulated Oligo.3 DEGs inE4+ carriers (,). There was significant enrichment between Grubman et al. downregulated genes in Oligo and AA downregulated genes in Oligo.3 (). Grubman et al. also examined DEGs between AD and control donors in six Oligo subclusters. Our Oligo.3 subcluster had the highest correlation with their Oligo o4 subcluster, which was present in both AD and control donors (). Oligo o4 showed upregulation of genes enriched in synapse organization, calcium signaling, and metal ion transport, similar to GO terms identified for upregulated Oligo.3 DEGs in E4+ carriers ().

Next we compared our snRNA-seq DEGs to cell type DEGs from Blanchard et al., which analyzed gene expression differences between E3/E3 against E3/E4 and E4/E4 Oligos in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of 20 AD and 12 control donors. We found significant enrichment between our Oligo.3 downregulated DEGs in E4+ carriers and their AD downregulated Oligo genes in E3/E4 vs. E3/E3 carriers, again includingand(,). We also observed opposite significant enrichment between Oligo.3 E4+ upregulated DEGs and several sets of DEGs identified by Blanchard et al.: downregulated Oligo DEGs identified in E3/E4 vs. E3/E3 in donors with no AD, DEGs from E4+ vs. E3/E3 in all donors, and induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSC)-derived E4/E4 vs. E3/E3 Oligos (). Ancestry-specific Oligo.3 AA DEGs also showed opposite significant enrichment (). Congruently, Oligo.3 E4+ upregulated DEGs were enriched with upregulated DEGs in iPSC-derived Oligos(). Blanchard et al. highlighted that genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis were upregulated in Oligos betweengenotypes, while myelination-related genes were downregulated. In contrast, we did not see differential expression of cholesterol-related genes in Oligo.3, but we did replicate downregulation of myelination-related genes (,,, and,). While not significant, the same trend was observed in ancestry-specific DEGs ().

Together, our study inE4+ carriers and two previously published studies in AD donors consistently show downregulation of oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination genes, such asand, and their corresponding GO terms. While myelination and oligodendrocyte differentiation have been previously implicated in AD pathogenesis, we link these processes to changes in a specific oligodendrocyte population inE4+ carriers of middle age with no clinical signs of AD.

2.8 |

Association betweencarriers and AD pathology linked to Oligo.3

To identify common gene expression signatures between SRT and snRNA-seq data, we used a Multi-Omics Factor Analysis (MOFA) framework to define coordinated gene expression patterns, or MOFA factors, across the datasets. Each MOFA factor assigns contribution weights to expressed genes independently for each input gene expression view (either a SRT SpD or a snRNA-seq subcluster), thus summarizing coordinated expression across spatially-defined local cell communities and cell types. MOFA factors are then compressed into a latent space such that each donor has one score for each MOFA factor. The donor-level MOFA factor scores can then be tested for statistical association with donor-level covariates. The gene-level MOFA factor weights provide information about the contribution from each gene to the MOFA factor within each SRT SpD or snRNA-seq subcluster. The genes with the highest and lowest gene-level MOFA factor weights provide a signature pattern for the factor, and these signature genes provide a biological functional interpretation for the factor. Overall, MOFA factors link coordinated expression patterns to jointly explain differences between donors. We calculated 7 MOFA factors from both snRNA-seq subclusters and SRT SPDs, then tested for factor associations withcarrier status (E2+ or E4+), ancestry, age, sex. We also considered several measures of AD pathology, including Braak stage and CERAD score, since MOFA examines factor weights on a per donor basis (,,:). We note that only eighteen donors had available Braak staging as middle age donors with no clinical AD symptoms are not routinely screened for AD pathology. To overcome this limitation, we performed immunostaining for pTau in adjacent ERC tissue sections from each donor (). Overall levels of pathology increased with age, but did not separate bycarrier status ().

We identified that MOFA factor 3 donor-level scores were associated withcarrier status and pTau pathology (). Factor 3 explained a high percent of gene expression variance in WM~SpDin SRT data and Oligo.3, Oligo.4, Oligo.5 (Oligo.3-5), and Excit.L5.2 in snRNA-seq data (). Higher factor 3 scores were nominally associated with E4+ vs. E2+ (p = 0.014, FDR = 0.095,) and female vs. male donors (p = 0.056, FDR = 0.395,). Surprisingly, MOFA factor 3 donor-level scores also had a significant negative association (FDR< 0.05) with pTau scores in adjacent ERC tissue sections (), indicating that genes implicated in this coordinated gene expression pattern were associated with both AD risk and pTau levels. A combined category ofcarrier status and pTau detection showed highest factor 3 donor-level scores for E4+ and no detection of pTau ().

To biologically interpret MOFA factor 3, we next examined its signature genes in WM~SpDand Oligo.3-5 (-). The top five MOFA factor 3 signature genes that had high gene-level weights in WM~SpDor Oligo.3-5 () overlapped with upregulated E4+ DEGs in Oligo.3 (), although not all these genes were Oligo.3 upregulated E4+ DEGs, or WM~SpDor Oligo.4-5 upregulated E4+ DEGs. Likewise, the top five MOFA factor 3 signature genes with the lowest gene-level weights had lower expression in E4+ in Oligo.3-5 and WM~SpD, with only three of these genes being E4+ downregulated DEGs in Oligo.3 (-). MOFA factor 3 composed a coordinated expression pattern in Oligo.3-5 in the spatially defined WM~SpDcell community, and this coordinated expression pattern explained differences betweencarriers and observed pTau pathology in ERC. The MOFA framework identified signature genes that supported the independent DEG analysis results in Oligo.3. At the same time, MOFA identified additional genes contributing torisk changes in other Oligo subclusters and WM~SpD, such as, and(). These genes were not expressed in Oligo.3-5, but were expressed in WM~SpD(), and have been previously implicated in AD and oligodendrocyte maturation.The MOFA framework thus independently supported DGE results, while also recovering complementary smaller expression changes missed by DGE analyses. In summary, MOFA provided further evidence for non-myelinating oligodendrocytes (Oligo.3-5 subclusters,) as vulnerable inE4+ carriers and identified additional genes previously implicated in AD in these cell types and associated WM.

3 |

Discussion

Here we characterized the spatio-molecular landscape of epidemiological AD risk factors (carrier status, ancestry, and sex) at cellular resolution in the neurotypical human ERC by generating paired SRT and snRNA-seq data from middle age donors. Our study focuses on the molecular biology of risk prior to pathology associated with clinical dementia. We annotated nine spatial domains (SpDs) and 38 cellular subclusters in the SRT and snRNA-seq data, respectively. The organization of SpDs reflected the structure of the periallocortex, highlighting reduced laminar organization compared to neocortical structures such as the DLPFC. Unique ERC SpDs included LD~SpD, with decreased cellular density, and WM.uf~SpD, a fibertrack WM region. In the paired snRNA-seq data, we defined glial subclusters including five oligodendrocytes subclusters that map to different stages of oligodendrocyte maturation. This data provides a resource for understanding the spatio-molecular organization of the human ERC, and is explorable through interactive web application: SRT data viaand snRNA-seq data through. Analysis of-dependent risk revealed the most transcriptomic differences in glia-enriched SpDs (WM.uf~SpDand Vasc~SpD) and a non-myelinating oligodendrocyte sub-cluster (Oligo.3), including ancestry-specific changes.

SRT facilitated localization of-dependent changes across the spatial topography of the ERC. We found the highest number of-dependent DEGs in vasculature and WM domains (Vasc~SpD, and WM.uf~SpD). These data provide evidence that transcriptomic changes may occur early on in WM in individuals with high AD risk, which is consistent with changes in WM preceding accumulation of plaques and tangles in animal models. Changes in Vasc~SpDcould reflectE4+ dysfunction in the blood brain barrier, which has been noted in pre-clinical AD. Downregulated DEGs in WM and vasculature inE4+ carriers were also enriched for myelination-related GO terms, which may reflect early changes leading to reduced or altered myelination, which has been observed in the WM of AD patients, particularly in the ERC.upregulation in Vasc~SpDand L5~SpDis counter to findings ofdownregulation in AD, but this discrepancy could reflect evolving changes or compensation as a factor of risk, early pathology, and more advanced AD. SRT studies in human ERC tissue from AD donors could clarify how disease progression impacts these changes. Differential expression of bothand its receiverin different SpDs and cell types could be evidence of dysregulation of ligand-receptor pairs.

While SRT data highlighted transcriptomic changes associated with vasculature inE4+ carriers, we did not detect many DEGs associated with vasculature by snRNA-seq (). This discrepancy is likely due to insufficient power (~53 vascular cells/donor,). Previous imaging studies found that neurofibrillary tangles were concentrated in L2 during AD progression, and AD mouse models highlighted L2 neuron vulnerability. We did not observe DEGs in L2.3~SpDand only 7 total DEGs in excitatory L2 subclusters (). Among other neuronal SpDs, a limited number of DEGs (21 total) were identified in Inhib~SpD, L5~SpD, and L6~SpD(), suggesting thatrisk has a limited effect in ERC GM layers. For neuronal cell types, we detected moderate signal at the broad cell type level (), which only resulted in a few DEGs at the fine subcluster resolution (), likely due to the small number of cells per donor for these subclusters ()and the potentially limitedimpact on ERC neurons. Differences between snRNA-seq and SRT results likely reflect the fact that snRNA-seq measures only nuclear transcripts, while SRT measures both cytosolic and neuropil transcripts. Our paired dataset provides a more comprehensive assessment of gene expression changes across spatial compartments and fine resolution subclusters.

Fine cell type subclusters provided a high resolution view of cellular diversity in the ERC, allowing for detection ofassociated changes in Oligo.3. Multiple findings pointed to an association betweenE4+ carriers and impaired oligodendrocyte differentiation, which supports a recent hypothesis that a vulnerable pre-myelinating oligodendrocyte contributes to AD. Gene expression in Oligo.3 suggests that this sub-cluster is non-myelinating, combined with trajectory analysis this could suggest a pre-myelinating identity, although further work is needed to profile oligodendrocyte maturation process in the human ERC. Our DGE analyses support the hypothesis that maturation is stalled in E4+ Oligo.3 , which could explain the reduced proportions of myelinating Oligo.1 and Oligo.2 observed in E4+ donors through cell type frequency analyses. Corresponding increases in OPC.5 could also be linked to this disruption, perhaps from increased OPC recruitment in response to inadequate numbers of myelinating oligocytes (-). Reduction of myelinating Oligo populations could disrupt myelination, which may be related to the first signs of neurodegeneration and/or AD pathogenesis. Our cell type frequency changes in E4+ carriers are in line with observations of increased frequency of OPCs in an AD mouse model and decreased Oligos in postmortem AD patients, although AD-associated frequency changes in oligodendrocytes are inconsistent across the literature. Althoughattempts to control for confounding factors, cell type frequency analyses in snRNA-seq data can be biased, and validation with alternative assays would provide further support for these observations. Furthermore, while our data suggests alteration of oligodendrocyte maturation, we cannot exclude the possibility that Oligo.3 cells mediate risk via direct interactions with neurons and glia independent of a role in myelination.

Since expression ofin Oligo.3 is low, the mechanism by whichallelic variation impacts this cell type is likely indirect. High expression ofin Astros and observations thatE4+ disrupts lipid transport and oligodendrocyte differentiation via Astro-Oligo signaling suggests the involvement of astrocytes. Supporting the potential of astrocytes mediating this mechanism, DEGs in Astro.3 pointed to disruption of similar biological processes as in Oligo.3. Follow up work in cellular models will be necessary to elucidate the causal origin ofgenotype affecting Oligo.3 gene expression. For example, impaired signaling between Astro-Oligo could be directly investigated in human iPSC-derived co-cultures derived from E2+ and E4+ donors.

A unique aspect of our study design was assessing the impact of ancestry and sex on gene expression associated withcarrier status. We found large numbers of ancestry and sex-specific differences in Oligo.3 DEGs, suggesting that these factors could modulate the observed disruption in Oligo biology. Due to limitations in the number of female donors in our cohort, larger studies with more females will be needed to confirm sex-specific transcriptional changes. However, previous studies have reported male specific changes in Oligos from AD donors, providing evidence for sex-specific differences associated with illness state that may also be related to risk. We also found profound effects of ancestry on Oligo.3 gene expression acrosscarrier status. Given the comparable number of AA and EA donors, we were well powered to detect these findings. GO overrepresentation analysis of ancestry-specific Oligo.3 DEGs highlighted different functional pathways. For instance, only EA donors had E4+ upregulated genes involved in extracellular matrix organization, which is likely linked to the association ofE4+ with blood-brain barrier (BBB) dysfunction that predicts cognitive decline. Moreover,E4+ and amyloid beta have been found to modify microstructural abnormalities associated with BBB breakdown in the ERC in a predominantly EA cohort. Our study provides the first evidence that there are interactions between ancestry andrisk in cell types and SpDs of the ERC that may contribute to the reduced risk effect ofE4+ in AA compared with EA. Future studies should aim to replicate these findings in the ERC or other brain regions in a larger donor cohort carefully controlled for sex, ancestry, andcarrier status.

When comparing gene expression changes associated with AD risk in ERC to previously published snRNA-seq datasets in other brain regions from patients with AD, we encountered both commonalities, such as E4+ downregulated oligodendrocyte DEGs, and contrasting findings, such as Oligo.3 E4+ upregulated genes enriched in downregulated DEG sets from other cell types. Discrepancies could be due to differences in 1) statistical methods, 2) demographics between donors, 3) brain region (e.g. PFC vs. ERC), 4) sample size, and 5) presence of AD pathology. Specifically regarding statistical methods used, previous AD DGE results were computed using effective cell-level gene marker finding methods, instead of pseudobulk DGE methods that allow adjusting for sample-level covariates, batch effects, cell type heteroscedasticity, high frequency of zeros in expression data, or identify differential detection. An analysis of previously published snRNA-seq AD datasetscombining a common oligodendrocyte subcluster annotation with the latest sc/snRNA-seq DGE statistical methods could be useful to validate differences in oligodendrocytes across brain regions, AD risk in additional neurotypical donors, and changes due to the presence of AD.

Using cell-to-cell communication (CCC) analysis, we identified ligand-receptor (LR) pairs involving DEGs associated withcarrier status. However, we only observed LR pairs involving DEGs in Oligo.3, potentially due to the larger number of DEGs in this subcluster (). Overall, Oligo.3 was implicated as both a source and target across different LR pairs (115 vs 111), and frequently communicated with Excit.L2 and other neuronal subclusters along with itself (). Some Oligo.3 LR pairs involving DEGs could be involved in communication cascades leading to further changes in Oligo.3 betweencarrier groups. While we had hypothesized that CCC results might linkexpressing astrocytes to Oligos and show overlap with Oligo.3 DEGs, no such genes were identified. Further research will be needed to determine whetherallele changes originate in Oligo.3, or if Oligo.3 is the most susceptible to alterations in cell to cell communication from other-expressing cell types.

Multi-Omics Factor Analysis (MOFA)identified factor 3, which represented a coordinated expression pattern between non-myelinating Oligos (Oligo.3-5) and WM~SpD. Interestingly, pTau detection in the ERC had a strong negative association with MOFA factor 3. On the other hand, MOFA factor 3 supported a positive association betweenrisk and E4+ upregulated gene expression changes in Oligo.3-5 (snRNA-seq) and WM (SRT), while additionally implicating genes not found through DGE. MOFA identified genes associated with AD risk only expressed in WM~SpDthat were not detected in Oligo.3-5, including:which was recently linked to AD genome wide association study using UK Biobank data, which is important for neural stem cell homeostasisand was identified as a DEG in 1-month-old mice from a triple transgenic mouse model of AD; andwhose deficiency decreases astrocyte activation and increases oligodendrocyte maturation in demyelinating mouse brain model. MOFA also detected, an upregulated E4+ DEG expressed in both WM~SpDand Oligo.3.has a copy number variant associated with AD and is a hippocampus CA3 AD DEG. These findings suggest that transcriptomic differences in Oligo.3 and other non-myelinating oligodendrocytes may precede the onset of AD pathology in high risk individuals, and further transcriptional differences occur at the onset of pTau deposition. Supporting this interpretation, Blanchard et al.showed greater downregulation of myelination genes in donors without AD pathology relative to positive AD pathology. Our work provides important justification for future studies to investigate this relationship using iPSC-derived co-cultures of cortical neurons and oligodendrocytes, as well as assembloid models to interrogate oligodendrocyte functionin the context of AD risk and resilience.

While this study was primarily focused on understandingE4+ risk and E2+ resilience in the context of AD, it is important to note thatE4+ has also been associated with increased risk of cognitive decline in Parkinson’s disease (PD). Interestingly, we found upregulation of the PD-associated genein Oligo.3, highlighting this oligodendrocyte subcluster as potentially also relevant for PD.has varied roles across tissues and cell types, including cytoskeletal function, membrane trafficking, subcellular localization and ability to phosphorylate members of the family of Rab-GTPases. In the brain,is most highly expressed in OPCs, although the literature exploringexpression in the human brain is scarce.expression has been associated with oligodendrocyte differentiation, with evidence thatknockdown prevents differentiation and subsequent oligodendrocyte maturation. Pre-myelinating oligodendrocytes have also been recently linked to PD genetic risk, supporting a potential broader role for Oligo.3 in neurodegenerative diseases. Our results suggest that oligodendrocyte differentiation could be a key process by whichE4+ andinteract with potential impact on both PD and AD.

In the current study, we examined molecular changes in the ERC, a brain region involved in the first stages of AD. However, AD pathogenesis involves multiple brain regions. For example, norepinephrine (NE) neurons in the locus coeruleus (LC) send neuronal projections to the ERC forming a unidirectional LC-ERC circuit that is an initial site of degeneration in AD. The molecular changes that contribute to AD progression and disrupted functional connectivity in the LC-ERC circuit are not understood. The MOFA framework allows integrating data from different assays performed on the same set of donors, even if not all genes are expressed in the different input gene expression views. This makes the MOFA framework ideal for integrating gene expression data from different brain regions that almost by definition, do not express the same sets of genes.

In conclusion, we used integrated SRT and snRNA-seq approaches to define the cellular and molecular anatomical organization of the human ERC in a unique cohort of donors stratified bycarrier status, sex, and ancestry. We found that transcriptional changes associated with increased AD risk converged on a non-myelinating oligodendrocyte population, with differences in dysregulation between African and European ancestry. Our findings suggest that AD risk in the ERC may be associated with disrupted oligodendrocyte function and changes in myelination, potentially contributing to future neurodegeneration.

Materials and Methods

Tissue

Post-mortem human tissue samples

Postmortem human brain tissue from control donors of European or African ancestry with allelic variation at thelocus (E2/E2, E2/E3, E3/E4, and E4/E4) were obtained at the time of autopsy following informed consent from legal next-of-kin, through the Maryland Department of Health IRB protocol #12–24 and the County of Santa Clara Medical Examiner-Coroner Office in San Jose, CA, under the WCG protocol #20111080. Additional samples were consented through the National Institute of Mental Health Intramural Research Program under NIH protocol #90-M-0142, and were acquired by LIBD via material transfer agreement. Using a standardized strategy, all donors were subjected to clinical characterization and diagnosis. Macroscopic and microscopic neuropathological examinations were performed, and subjects with evidence of significant neuropathology were excluded. Additional details regarding tissue acquisition, processing, dissection, clinical characterization, diagnoses, neuropathological examination, RNA extraction and quality control (QC) measures have been previously published. Demographic information for all 31 donors initially dissected is listed in,. Sex expression quality control later led us to drop 1 sample recorded as anE3/E4 AA male, which was actually an E3/E4 AA female whose age at time of death was 17 years, and thus the sample could not be included in other analyses downstream of clustering (,:). African Ancestry donors in this study are of sub-Saharan African Ancestry. Each tissue block was dissected from frozen coronal slabs at the level of the amygdala or the hippocampus. Using a hand-held dental drill, tissue blocks of approximately 1 X 1.5 mm were dissected across the collateral sulcus. Tissue blocks were stored in sealed cryogenic bags at −80°C until cryosectioning.

Tissue processing and anatomical validation

To anatomically validate the inclusion of ERC in tissue blocks, we performed multiplexed single-molecule fluorescence in situ hybridization (smFISH) on cryosections. Briefly, 10 μm thick sections were cut on a Leica Biosystems cryostat and mounted onto glass slides. Molecular signatures for distinct ERC cortical layers were probed to distinguish ERC from adjacent cortical regions. Specifically, we targeted three layer-selective markers —(layer 1),(layer 3), and(layer 5) as well asto delineate white matter. smFISH was performed using the RNAScope platform, following the manufacturer’s instructions for the Fluorescent Multiplex Kit v2 and the 4-plex Ancillary Kit (catalog nos. 323100, 323120, Advanced Cell Diagnostics). Tissue sections were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin (catalog no. HT501128, Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at room temperature, followed by sequential dehydration in 50%, 70%, and twice in 100% ethanol. Sections were then pretreated with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min and incubated with Protease IV for 30 min at room temperature. RNAScope probes were applied as follows:(Cat No. 413051-C2),(Cat No. 829021-C4),(Cat No. 532881-C1), and(Cat No. 411051-C3), all from Advanced Cell Diagnostics. Probe hybridization was performed according to manufacturer protocols. After hybridization, tissue sections were stored overnight in a 4X saline-sodium citrate buffer (catalog no. 10128-690, VWR). Signal amplification was carried out (AMP 1-3), followed by labeling with Opal Dyes 570, 620, 690 and 520 (catalog nos. FP1488001KT, FP1495001KT, FP1497001KT, FP1487001KT, Akoya Biosciences; all at 1:500 dilution). Sections were counterstained with DAPI (4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole) for 20 seconds to visualize nuclei, and cover slipped using Fluoromount-G mounting medium (catalog no. 0100-01, Southern Biotechnology). Slides were stored and protected from light for at least 24 hours prior to imaging. Imaging was performed on a Nikon AXR confocal microscope with NIS-Elements software, using a Nikon APO Lambda D 20x/0.80 or APO LAmbda S 40X/1.25 objective for high-resolution analysis. For anatomical quality control, whole-slide imaging was performed in a single plane using a Nikon Plan APO Lambda D 2X/0.1 objective.

pTau immunostaining

Additional 10 μm sections were cryosectioned to detect the presence of phosphorylated tau (pTau) accumulation in the ERC. RNAScope in situ hybridization combined with immunofluorescence (RNAScope-IF) staining was performed targeting pTau (n=1 tissue section per donor). Prior to fixation, 10% Neutral Buffered Formalin solution (NBF, Cat no. HT501128, Sigma-Aldrich) was chilled for 1 hour at 4°C. Slides were incubated in the prechilled 10% NBF for 15 min at 4°C. After fixation, tissue sections were processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol using the RNAScope Fluorescent Multiplex Kit V2 (Cat no. 323110, ACD). Samples underwent a graded ethanol dehydration series (50%, 70% and twice in 100% ethanol) at room temperature (RT). Following the dehydration step, a hydrophobic barrier was applied using a barrier pen (Cat. no. H-4000, Vector Laboratories) to ensure that all subsequent regents fully covered the tissue sections. The samples were then pretreated with hydrogen peroxide for 10 min at RT. Next, samples were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody mouse anti-p-Tau (Ser202/Thr205)-AT8 (Cat no. MN1020B, Invitrogen) diluted 1:20 in antibody diluent. After incubation, slides were washed and post-fixed in 10% NBF for 30 mins at RT, followed by protease treatment for 30 min at RT to optimize probe accessibility. Sections were then incubated with a mixture of two RNAScope probes:(Cat no. 411051, Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, California) and(Cat no. 518851-C3, Advanced Cell Diagnostics) for 2 hours at 40°C in a humidified chamber. Following hybridization, samples were washed five times with RNAScope wash buffer at RT. Signal amplification was performed using the RNAScope AMP 1-3 reagents, followed by fluorescence probe labeling with Opal Dye 520 (Cat. no. FP1487001K, Akoya Biosciences) and Opal dye 690 (Cat. no. FP1498001K, Akoya Biosciences). After probe labeling, samples were incubated with secondary antibody Donkey anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 555 (Cat no., Invitrogen) at a 1:500 dilution for 40 min at RT in the dark.

Following secondary antibody incubation, samples were counterstained with DAPI and mounted using Flouromount-G (Cat no. 01001-01, Southern Biotech), then stored in the dark overnight to dry before imaging. Slides were imaged using a Nikon AXR confocal microscope system with NIS-Elements imaging software vAR6.10.01, utilizing a Nikon APO lambda D 20x/0.8 objective and/or a Nikon APO lambda S 40x/1.25 objective. All lambda stacks were acquired using identical imaging settings and laser power. For the 20x objective, tile images were captured to encompass cortical layers L1 through white matter (WM). After image acquisition, all 31 samples were accessed for the pTau signal. Samples were considered pTau-positive if three or more discrete pTau signals were identified per section by visual inspection by two independent experimenters blinded to sample ID. Of the total 31 samples, 9 were classified as pTau-positive, and 22 as pTau-negative according to this criterion.

Visium H&E data generation

Tissue sections (10 μm thick) were prepared in a cryostat and mounted directly onto Visium Gene Expression Slides (10x Genomics). One section from each donor was placed within a single Visium capture area with experimenter blinded to sample ID, resulting in a total of 31 samples. Sample composition within an individual slide was organized across demographic variables (genotype, sex, ancestry) to mitigate bias to the extent possible (). Sections were fixed in methanol and stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) following the manufacturer’s protocol (User GuideRev C). H&E stained slides were imaged on a Leica CS2 equipped with a 20x objective and 2x doubler, prior to downstream molecular processing to facilitate subsequent tissue alignment. After imaging, tissue sections were processed using the Visium Spatial Gene Expression protocol (User GuideRev D). Briefly, tissue was permeabilized (optimized at 18 mins based on empirical testing with a representative sample), enabling release of mRNA for subsequent reverse transcription. Synthesized cDNA was then enzymatically removed from the slide and used to construct spatial transcriptomic libraries according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries underwent quality control assessment and were sequenced on the Illumina Novaseq 6000 platform at the Johns Hopkins Single Cell Transcriptomics Core, following the manufacturer’s specifications, with a minimum sequencing depth of 60,000 reads per spot.

Ancestry inference

Genotype calling was performed using several Illumina BeadChip DNA microarrays. Usingv1.9we excluded variants with a minor allele frequency (MAF) less than 0.5%, a missingness rate of 5% or more, and a Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE) p<1x10-5. Genotype phasing and imputation were performed using the NHLBI NIH TOPMed imputation service with the GRCh38 TOPMed reference panel. We finally filtered the imputed genotype data to keep only variants having MAF > 0.01.

We inferred local and global ancestry in our study samples using(Fast Local Ancestry Estimation), which extends the Li and Stephens haplotype copying model within a hidden Markov framework. Study sample genotypes were first phased and missing genotypes were imputed with. We used three reference populations from the 1000 Genomes Project: YRI (African), CHB (East Asian), and CEU (European) ().was run separately for each chromosome using the phased study genotypes, phased reference haplotypes, a GRCh38 genetic map, a minimum minor allele frequency threshold of 0.01 in the reference VCF (), and other default parameters.

Donor demographics check

After clustering and annotation of the snRNA-seq and Visium data types, it was discovered that one of the included donors (Br1289) was incompatible with the study design (). This identified expression of female sex-specific genes on donor Br1289 who is a male donor (). Upon further verification, a typo in the case donor selection table was discovered: it is actually Br1285. As this donor (Br1285) had an age of 17 years at time of death which is outside the age range used for this study (,), it was dropped from further downstream analyses. The data from Br1285 is still valid and could be used for other purposes outside thecarrier analyses described in this manuscript. For example, Br1285’s data (labeled as Br1289 in tables, figures, and files) is still useful for SpD or snRNA-seq cell type identification.

Visium

Visium raw data processing

Sample slide images were first processed using.was used to divide the Visium sample slides into individual capture areas using thefunction. This function takes one large image from the entire slide and separates them into individual capture areas, each capture area on the slide, labeled as A1, B1, C1 and D1. These individual capture area images were used as one of the inputs for.

Individual capture area images fromwere spatially aligned to Visium Slide capture areas using the(version 7.0.1, 10x Genomics). This alignment enabled precise correspondence between histological features and individual capture spots on the slide.

The Visium FASTQ and image data were pre-processed with the 10xpipeline v2.1.0, using human reference genome GRCh38 and 2020-A annotation. Out of 154,752 total spots, 122,742 were in-tissue, with a median 3,989 spots a sample (min=2,396, max=4,880). Counts were detected for 32,006 genes. In-tissue spots have a median of 3,327 UMIs, and a median of 1,573 detected genes ().

Visium data processing and quality control

Quality control metrics were calculated withv1.17.0. For quality control manual annotation was used to identify 143 spots on tissue pieces separate from the main tissue section, and small tails of tissue on the edges of the sections. In tandem,fromv0.99.5was applied to identify local outliers in three quality control metrics: low library size, low detected gene count, and high rate of mitochondrial gene expression. The 403 spots (0.3%) that were local outliers in one or more metrics were discarded. In total 544 spots were dropped during quality control, leaving 122,202 total in-tissue spots with a median of 3,964 per sample (min=2,367, max = 4,869). H&E images, total number of UMIs, and known marker genes were visualized with spotplots to verify the data quality (-).

Visium spatial clustering

Feature selection

Spatially variable genes were identified for each sample withv1.8.0. A set of 1,454 genes that passedin 5 or more samples, and had an average rank of < 1,500, was selected as the spatially variable genes (SVGs) for this dataset.

A set of layer marker genes from spatial domains, associated with cortical layers was accessed with spatialLIBD, selecting the top 100 enrichment genes for each spatial domain. 441 of these genes had already been detected as SVGs. The union of these two gene sets, n = 1,765 genes, was selected for dimension reduction and clustering.

Dimension reduction

Principal component analysis was run using the union set of SVG and layer markers, withv1.30.1. Batch correction was performed withv 1.2.0, usingon the PCs. Visual inspection of thecorrected PCs showed a reduction of batch effects by Visium slide or sample effects (,).

Clustering

Visium spots were clustered into spatial domains (SpD) usingv1.11.0, a spatially aware clustering method, using the functionon a range of(equivalent tofornotation) values from 2 to 28 in increments of 1. The optimal value=9 was determined from the maximum negative log likelihood values predicted byfrom(,). The total number of spots for each SpD and their proportion across each donor was checked to ensure that all SpDs were present in all samples ().

Visium spatial domain annotation & analysis

marker genes were found for each SpD usingfromv0.99.10(,).

Gene expression modeling was run on the SpDs usingfromv1.21.3, which pseudobulks the data by sample and SpD then runs anova, pairwise, and enrichment modeling.

To compare the ERC SpDs, the modeling results were compared to other Visium datasets from the human brain with cortical layer annotations. Specifically from=9spatial clustering that most closely reflected the classic cortical layers (SpD in DLPFC,). SpDs were also compared to Franjic et al. fine subcluster populations subset to ERC ().

AD risk gene set

We visualized expression of 23genes in the snRNA-seq and Visium data ().Alzheimer’s disease-associated gene list was downloaded on May 21, 2025.

Visium nuclei segmentation

To quantify the number of nuclei per spot, firstfromv4.0.1was run on each Visium sample’s H&E image to produce nuclear segmentations informat. Reading in spot coordinates fromand nuclear segmentations for each Visium sample, a customworkflow we developed was used to quantify nuclear counts within each Visium spot. In particular, spots and nuclear segmentations were imported ass usingv1.0.1, and a spatial join usingwas performed to ultimately calculate the number of nuclei fully within each Visium spot ().

Single-nucleus RNA-seq

snRNA-seq data collection and sequencing

Using 100μm cryosections collected from each donor, we conducted single-nucleus RNA-sequencing (snRNA-seq) using 10x Genomics Chromium Single Cell Gene Expression v3.1 technology. Approximately 70-100 mg of tissue was collected from each donor, placed in a pre-chilled 2 mL microcentrifuge tube (Eppendorf Protein LoBind Tube, Cat #22431102), and stored at −80°C until the time of experiment. To isolate nuclei, cryosections from each donor were combined with chilled Nuclei EZ Lysis Buffer (MilliporeSigma #NUC101) into a glass dounce. Sections were homogenized using 10-20 strokes with both loose and tight-fit pre-chilled pestles. Homogenates were filtered through 70 μm mesh strainers and centrifuged at 500g for 5 minutes at 4°C using a benchtop centrifuge. Nuclei pellets were resuspended in fresh EZ lysis buffer, centrifuged again, and resuspended in wash/resuspension buffer (1x PBS, 1% BSA, 0.2U/μL RNase Inhibitor). Final nuclei were washed in wash/resuspension buffer and centrifuged a total of 3 times. All nuclei were labeled with propidium iodide (PI) at 1:500 in wash/resuspension buffer and subsequently filtered through a 35 μm cell strainer. We performed fluorescent activated nuclear sorting (FANS) using a MoFlo Legacy Cell Sorter at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health Cell Sorting Core Facility. Gating criteria were selected for whole, singlet nuclei (by forward/side scatter) and G0/G1 nuclei (by PI fluorescence). We sorted 14,000 nuclei based on PI+ fluorescence to include both neuronal and non-neuronal nuclei from each donor. This resulted in a final=31 for snRNA-seq (1 PI+ sample for all 31 donors) with a total of 14,000 sorted nuclei per donor. We expected to retain approximately 2 out of 3 nuclei, resulting in a target of about 9,000 nuclei per donor. Samples were collected over multiple rounds, each containing 1-4 donors per round. All samples were sorted into reverse transcription reagents from the 10x Genomics Chromium Next GEM Single Cell 3’ v3.1 (dual-index) kit (without enzyme). Reverse transcription enzyme and water were added to bring the reaction to full volume. cDNA synthesis and subsequent library generation was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (, revision E, 10x Genomics). Samples were sequenced on an Illumina Novaseq 6000 at the Johns Hopkins University Single Cell and Transcriptomics Sequencing Core to a minimum depth of 50,000 reads per nucleus.

snRNA-seq data processing and droplet quality control

Sequenced chromium data was processed withv7.2.0, using human reference genome GRCh38 and the 2020-A annotation. Samples were sequenced to a median depth of 525,073,680 reads, with a median of 5,369 median unique molecular indices (UMIs) per nucleus, and a median of 2,452 median genes per nucleus. A total of 38,480,710 droplets (min: 581,462, max: 1,732,806) were sequenced.

Empty droplets were identified withv1.22.0lower bound on UMI determined for each sample by the “knee point” calculated byplus 100, value ranging from 206 to 984 UMI. A manual knee of 200 was set for 6 samples based on the UMI rank curve (). A total of 160,743 non-empty droplets were identified, with a median 5,222 nuclei per sample (min=2,169, max=7,847,).

Doublets were identified withv1.16.0. A total of 10,820 doublets were detected and dropped (6.7% of non-empty droplets), leaving 149,923 single-nuclei droplets (). To further quality control the remaining nuclei, we evaluated three quality metrics: high percent mitochondrial reads, low total counts per nuclei (), and low number of detected genes. An adaptive 3 median absolute deviation (MAD) cutoff for each sample was applied withfromv1.12.0, any nuclei that are outliers in one or more metrics were excluded (). A total of 140,119 nuclei passed droplet quality control checks (93.4% of single-nuclei droplets), median 4,589 nuclei per donor; min=1,811, max = 6,946 ().

snRNA-seq preliminary clustering and annotation

Reduced dimensions were calculated with generalized linear models principal component analysis (GLM-PCA). The top 2,000 deviant genes were selected withfromv1.14.0. Principal components (PCs) were calculated withandv1.30.1.

Batch correction was performed withv1.2.1, usingon the GLM PCs. Visual inspection of the-corrected PCs showed a reduction of batch and donor effects ().

The nuclei were then clustered usingv1.30.2andv2.1.4yielding 44 preliminary clusters. Cell type annotations were automatically identified with’sutilizing the provided brain marker gene database().

Clusters were assessed for quality by evaluating if the median value was over the cell class-specific (neuron or non-neuron) cutoff defined by the median + 3 * MAD cutoffs for sum UMI, detected genes, and percent mitochondria expression, or median> 0.5. The resulting cluster quality metric cutoffs were:

Out of 44 clusters, 29 passed all quality metric cutoffs, retaining 125,771 nuclei ().

Sum UMI: non-neuron > 1,340.94, neuron > 5,592.43

Detected genes: non-neuron > 1,217.95, neuron > 4,174.27

Percent mitochondria: non-neuron < 0.4, neuron < 0.53

snRNA-seq secondary optimal clustering and annotation

After dropping low quality clusters, normalized counts were recomputed withv1.34.0and, thenv1.34.0for computing log-normalized expression values.

Reduced dimensions were recalculated using the GLM-PCA process described for the preliminary clusters. Similarly, batch correction was repeated on the updated PCs using.

An optimal clustering was determined by testing values ofnearest neighbors from 10 to 30 inand then clustered with(). Clustering was evaluated by an elbow point in the number of clusters and the maximum mean silhouette scorev1.16.0oncorrected PCs.=13 was selected as the optimal optimal clustering with max mean silhouette score 0.049 resulting in 23 clusters (). Clusters were annotated by, and clusters were again evaluated for quality as described for the preliminary clusters, dropping one Oligo cluster, retaining 125,683 nuclei ().

snRNA-seq non-neuronal subclustering and annotation

Nuclei identified as non-neuronal cell types (98,669 nuclei from Astro, Micro, Oligo, OPC, and Endo cell types) were subclustered to identify more fine grained subclusters. The nuclei from each cell type were subset, then clustered using scranandsimilarly to the preliminary clustering. Again clusters failing the quality cutoffs were dropped, resulting in 94,990 non-neuronal and a total of 122,004 nuclei with a median of 3,949 nuclei per sample (min=1,517, max=6,288,,,).

Marker gene expression expression confirmed the clusters’s broad cell type identities (). Gene expression modeling was run on subclusters usingfromv1.21.3. Single-cell registration withto external datasets Franjic et al. fine subcluster populations subset to ERC, and PsyENCODE DLPFC cell typessupported both the broad cell type and fine subcluster annotations ().marker genes were found for cell subclusters usingfromv0.99.10(,).

Differential proportion analysis

Differential proportion analysis was performed for SpDs in Visium data, and fine subclusters in snRNA-seq data.

The proportions of each cluster were compared using the differential proportion analysis tools fromv1.0.0. Count frequencies were transformed to centered log ratio values (CLR) by. Variance partition was completed withfromv1.38.1.

For Visium differential SpD proportions were tested withimplemented in, fitting(,). Covariate effectswere removed usingfromv0.99.34().

For snRNA-seq differential cell cluster proportions were tested with, fitting(,). From the previous model formula, covariate effects were removed usingfromv0.99.34protecting(),and(-), orand().

Differential expression analysis

Differential expression (DE) on carrier status (E2+ vs. E4+) was run by “cluster” on pseudobulked data on Visium SpDs, and snRNA-seq broad cell types and fine resolution subclusters. Data was pseudobulked withv1.21.5, which has adefault filter that that removes pseudobulked samples with less than 10 spots for SpDs and cells for snRNA-seq. Clusters with less than two pseudobulked samples for either carrier status were excluded from DE analyses.

By cluster, genes were normalized and filtered for low expression byv4.6.2and, respectively.

The“carrier” model formulawas fit withfrom, usingas a blocking variable in snRNA-seq andin Visium data. Contrast matrices were created and fit with, andfromv3.64.1(,,,,,-,,,).

Ancestry-specific analysis were fit with model formula, whereis a variable combiningcarrier status and ancestry reported by legal next-of-kin and confirmed by death records ().

Sex-specific analysis excluded genes from the X and Y chromosome, also did not consider ancestry as we had a low number of donors for females. Here we fit model formula, whereis a variable combiningcarrier status and sex ().

Gene ontology overrepresentation analysis

Gene ontology overrepresentation analysis was run withv4.16.0. Dot plots were created with(,-,-,,,). Parent GO terms were found withandv1.20.0(-,,,,).

Oligodendrocyte subcluster trajectory analysis

Oligo and OPC subcluster trajectory was predicted from PCs calculated on the snRNA-seq dataset, subset to just OPC and Oligo nuclei. Centroids were found withfromv1.18.0. Minimum spanning tree was calculated with, coordinates supplied with, and pseudotime calculated withfromv1.46.0(,).

DEG enrichment analysis with external datasets

DEG enrichment analyses were performed usingfor the 2 by 2 tables comparing a reference and a target gene set (,,), similar to howandare used for comparing enriched SpD marker gene sets against user-specified gene sets. However, this case was more complex as each comparison involved cluster-specific differential expression results.

Integrative analyses

Spot deconvolution

The spot deconvolution methodwas used to integrate the Visium and snRNA-seq by identifying the proportions of cells in each Visium spot. For each sample we ranas implemented inv1.0.0 withandin order to match the median number of nuclei intersecting with a spot (:), with either the broad or the fine resolution snRNA-seq data as the input. The broad resolution results confirmed the spatial registration results (,). The fine resolution results were unreliable as only one subcluster per non-neuronal cell type was commonly detected, despitecurrently being frequently benchmarked as the most accurate spot deconvolution method(). This is likely due to the difficulty in detecting differences between highly similar subclusters ().

Multicellular factor analysis

Multicellular factor analysis (MOFA) was performed withv0.0.0.9, as described in the vignette. The pseudobulked Visium and snRNA-seq data was combined into a “mofa” object with. A MOFA model was fit withandusing default options except forand. Association with sample covariates was computed with. The MOFA heatmap plot was created with(,). To assess significance of factor-demographic variable associations,uses a linear model for continuous demographic variables and performs ANOVA for categorical variables. The associated p-value is Benjamini-Hochberg-corrected (FDR), with each factor constituting a test.

Cell-cell communication

To quantify ligand-receptor (LR) interactions by sample and cell type pair,v1.5.1was first run using the snRNA-seq data as input. Specifically,was used with default arguments except, grouping by fine subcluster. To identify dataset-wide interactions of interest, ligand-receptor pairs for a given source and target subcluster were retained when theirwas commonly observed, defined as significant< 0.05) in at least 20 of 30 samples (-,). We performed a similar analysis at the broad cell type level, although no DEGs overlapped commonly observed LR interactions at broad cell type resolution.

To spatially validate ligand-receptor interactions, spatial connectivities were next computed in the Visium data for each sample using, with the exception ofand using a sample-specific bandwidth precisely encompassing immediate-neighboring spots. Then,was invoked for each sample. This produced a spatially aware score (bivariate score) at the spot level of the tendency of ligand and receptor to be locally co-expressed. The mean of this bivariate score was calculated for each LR interaction by SpD to assess domain-level co-expression (,).

Software

Analyses were performed using R versions 4.3 to 4.5with Bioconductor versions 3.18 to 3.21. Heatmaps were created withv2.22.0-2.24.1. Other visualizations were made usingv3.5.1 and v3.5.2. Interactive web applications were made usingv1.21.5andv2.20.0, and are both hosted on LIBD’s Posit Connect server with links listed at.

Supplementary Material

Supplement 1

Supplement 2

Table S1 Donor demographics. Demographics of donors included in the study, including pathology information. Related to,.

Table S2 SRT sample information. Sample information for SRT dataset including data generation metrics. Related to.

Table S4 SRT SpD differential proportions. Differential proportion statistics for SpDs fromanalysis computed with. Related to.

Table S5 snRNA-seq sample information. Sample information for snRNA-seq dataset including data generation metrics. Related to.

Table S8 snRNA-seq cell type differential proportions. Differential proportion statistics for cell types fromanalysis computed with. Related to,.

Table S10 SRT GO overrepresentation analysis. SRT SpD GO results for overallcarrier (E2+ vs. E4+) DEGs, and ancestry and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Table S12 snRNA-seq broad cell type GO overrepresentation analysis. snRNA-seq broad cell type GO results for overall DEGscarrier (E2+ vs. E4+), and ancestry and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Table S14 snRNA-seq subcluster GO overrepresentation analysis. snRNA-seq cell subcluster GO results for overallcarrier (E2+ vs. E4+) DEGs, and ancestry and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics werefrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Table S15 External dataset DEG enrichment results. Gene set enrichment analysis statistics of DE gene sets against Grubman and Blanchard differential expression datasets. These statistics were computed withfrom base R. Related to,.

Table S16 Cell to cell communication results summary. CCC summary data, including counts of commonly observed LR pairs by source and target, statistics for LR source-target interactions involving a DEG including mean bivariate score. See:for summary methods. Related to.

Supplement 3

Table S3 SpD marker genes. SRT SpD marker gene statistics from enrichment andanalysis. The statistics were computed withfromandfrom; see package documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Supplement 4

Table S6 Cell type subcluster marker genes. snRNA-seq cell type marker genes fromand enrichment analysis. The statistics were computed withfromandfrom; see package documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to,.

Supplement 5

Table S7 Spot deconvolution results. Spot deconvolution estimates frombyat the broad cell type resolution. Related to.

Supplement 6

Table S9 SRT differential expression results. Differential expression statistics for SpDs for overallcarrier (E2+ vs. E4+), ancestry, and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Supplement 7

Table S11 snRNA-seq broad cell type differential expression results. Differential expression statistics for broad cell types for overallcarrier (E2+ vs. E4+), ancestry, and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Supplement 8

Table S13 snRNA-seq subcluster differential expression results. Differential expression statistics for fine subclusters for overallcarrier (E2+ vs. E4+), ancestry, and sex specificcarrier DGE analysis. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.

Supplement 9

Table S17 MOFA results. MOFA statistics including gene expression variance explained (R) for SpD and subcluster views, covariate p-values, and donor factor scores. The statistics were computed withfrom; see its documentation for the definition of the variable names. Related to.